GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110006
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 1
Semester/Year : 1
Category of the Course : Engineering Science
Subject Name & Code : Basic Mechanical Engineering (3110006)
Prerequisite : Zeal to learn the subject
Rationale : Understanding of basic principles of Mechanical Engineering is required in various field of
engineering.
Teaching and Examination Scheme :
Teaching Scheme Credits Examination Marks Total
Marks	L T P C Theory Marks Practical Marks
ESE(E) PA (M) ESE (V) PA(I)
3 0 2 4 70 30 30 20 150
Content :
Sr Topic Total
Hrs.
1
Introduction: Prime movers and its types, Concept of Force, Pressure, Energy, Work, Power,
System, Heat, Temperature, Specific heat capacity, Change of state, Path, Process, Cycle, Internal
energy, Enthalpy, Statements of Zeroth law and First law.
4
2
Energy: Introduction and applications of Energy sources like Fossil fuels, Nuclear fuels, Hydro,
Solar, Wind, and Bio-fuels, Environmental issues like Global warming and Ozone depletion. 3
3
Properties of gases: Boyle's law, Charles's law, Gay-Lussac’s law, Avogadro’s law, Combined gas
law, Gas constant, Relation between cp and cv, Various non-flow processes like constant volume
process, constant pressure process, Isothermal process, Adiabatic process, Polytrophic process.
5
4
Properties of Steam: Steam formation, Types of steam, Enthalpy, Specific volume, Internal energy
and dryness fraction of steam, use of steam tables, steam calorimeters. 6
5
Heat Engines: Heat engine cycle and Heat engine, working substances, Classification of heat
engines, Description and thermal efficiency of Carnot; Rankine; Otto cycle and Diesel cycles. 5
6
Steam Boilers: Introduction, Classification, Cochran, Lancashire and Babcock and Wilcox boiler,
Functioning of different mountings and accessories. -
7
Internal Combustion Engines: Introduction, Classification, Engine details, four-stroke/ two-stroke
cycle Petrol/Diesel engines, Indicated power, Brake Power, Efficiencies. 4
8 Pumps: Types and operation of Reciprocating, Rotary and Centrifugal pumps, Priming. 3

-- 1 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110006
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 2
9
Air Compressors: Types and operation of Reciprocating and Rotary air compressors, significance
of Multistage. 3
10
Refrigeration & Air Conditioning: Refrigerant, Vapor compression refrigeration system, Vapor
absorption refrigeration system, Domestic Refrigerator, Window and split air conditioners. 4
11
Couplings, Clutches and Brakes: Construction and applications of Couplings (Box; Flange; Pin type
flexible; Universal and Oldham), Clutches (Disc and Centrifugal), and Brakes (Block; Shoe; Band and
Disc).
-
12
Transmission of Motion and Power: Shaft and axle, Different arrangement and applications of Belt
drive; Chain drive; Friction drive and Gear drive. -
13
Engineering Materials: Types, properties and applications of Ferrous & Nonferrous metals, Timber,
Abrasive material, silica, ceramics, glass, graphite, diamond, plastic and polymer. 4
Note : Topic No. 6, 11 and 12 of the above syllabus are to be covered in Practical Hours.
Distribution of marks weightage for cognitive level :
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
20 40 40 - - -
Note : This specification table shall be treated as a general guideline for students and teachers. The actual
distribution of marks in the question paper may vary slightly from above table.
Reference Books :
1. Elements of Mechanical Engineering by N M Bhatt and J R Mehta, Mahajan Publishing House
2. Basic Mechanical Engineering by Pravin Kumar, Pearson Education
3. Fundamental of Mechanical Engineering by G.S. Sawhney, PHI Publication New Delhi
4. Elements of Mechanical Engineering by Sadhu Singh, S. Chand Publication
5. Introduction to Engineering Materials by B.K. Agrawal, McGraw Hill Publication, New Delhi

-- 2 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110006
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 3
Course Outcome :
Sr.
No. CO statement Marks %
weightage
CO-1 Discuss the various sources of energy and basic terminology of Mechanical
engineering
14
CO-2 Make calculations for commonly used working fluids i.e. ideal gases and steam 22
CO-3 Analyze various heat engine cycles and understand construction and working of IC
engines
20
CO-4 Discuss working and applications of steam boilers and various energy conversion
systems
28
CO-5 Discuss various power transmission elements and properties of various engineering
materials with their applications
16
List of Experiments :
1. To understand construction and working of various types of boilers.
2. To understand construction and working of different boiler mountings and accessories.
3. To understand construction features of two/four stoke petrol/diesel engines
4. To determine brake thermal efficiency of an I. C. Engine.
5. To understand construction and working of different types of air compressors.
6. To demonstrate vapor compression refrigeration cycle of domestic refrigerator OR
window airconditioner OR split air conditioner.
7. To understand construction, working and application of clutches, coupling and brakes
8. To understand different arrangement and application of various power transmission drives
Major Equipment : Models of Cochran, Lancashire and Babcock and Wilcox boilers, models of various
mountings and accessories, Models of various types of IC engines, Single cylinder two stroke /four stroke petrol/
diesel engine, models of pumps, compressors, Domestic refrigerator/window air conditioner/split air conditioner,
models of various types of brakes, coupling, clutches, drives.
List of Open Source Software/learning website : https://nptel.ac.in, www.vlab.co.in

-- 3 of 3 --

