GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130703
Page 1 of 3
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
Semester – III
Subject Name: Database Management Systems
Type of course: Core
Prerequisite: Basic knowledge of Computer Programming
Rationale:
Database is an integral part of real life application system. The course will enable student understand the
different issues involved in the design and implementation of a database system. Student will learn the
physical and logical database designs, database modeling, relational, hierarchical, and network models.
Student will learn to use data manipulation language to query, update, and manage a database. Student will
understand essential DBMS concepts such as: database security, integrity, concurrency, storage strategies
etc. The students will get the hands on practice of using SQL and PL/SQL concepts.
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme Credits Examination Marks Total
Marks	L T P C Theory Marks Practical Marks
ESE (E) PA (M) ESE (V) PA (I)
4 0 2 5 70 30 30 20 150
Content:
Sr.
No.
Content Total
Hrs
% Weightage
1 Database system architecture: Data Abstraction, Data Independence, Data
Definition Language (DDL), Data Manipulation Language (DML).
03 05
2 Data models: Entity-relationship model, network model, relational and
object oriented data models, integrity constraints, data manipulation
operations.
06 12
3 Relational query languages: Relational algebra, Tuple and domain
relational calculus, SQL3, DDL and DML constructs, Open source and
Commercial DBMS - MYSQL, ORACLE, DB2, SQL server.
04 08
4 Relational database design: Domain and data dependency, Armstrong's
axioms, Normal forms, Dependency preservation, Lossless design.
05 10
5 Query processing and optimization: Evaluation of relational algebra
expressions, Query equivalence, Join strategies, Query optimization
06 10

-- 1 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130703
Page 2 of 3
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
Suggested Specification table with Marks (Theory): (For BE only)
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
15 15 15 10 10 05
Legends: R: Remembrance; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C:
Create and above Levels (Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)
Note: This specification table shall be treated as a general guideline for students and teachers. The actual
distribution of marks in the question paper may vary slightly from above table.
Reference Books:
1. “Database System Concepts”, 6th Edition by Abraham Silberschatz, Henry F. Korth, S. Sudarshan,
McGraw-Hill.
2. “Fundamentals of Database Systems”, 7th Edition by R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, Pearson
3. “An introduction to Database Systems”, C J Date, Pearson.
4. “Modern Database Management”, Hoffer , Ramesh, Topi, Pearson.
5. “Principles of Database and Knowledge – Base Systems”, Vol 1 by J. D. Ullman, Computer
Science Press.
algorithms.
6 Storage strategies: Indices, B-trees, hashing. 04 07
7 Transaction processing: Concurrency control, ACID property,
Serializability of scheduling, Locking and timestamp based schedulers,
Multi-version and optimistic Concurrency Control schemes, Database
recovery.
06 15
8 Database Security: Authentication, Authorization and access control, DAC,
MAC and RBAC models, Intrusion detection, SQL injection.
04 07
9 SQL Concepts : Basics of SQL, DDL,DML,DCL, structure – creation,
alteration, defining constraints – Primary key, foreign key, unique, not null,
check, IN operator, aggregate functions, Built-in functions –numeric, date,
string functions, set operations, sub-queries, correlated sub-queries, join,
Exist, Any, All , view and its types., transaction control commands.
10 18
10 PL/SQL Concepts : Cursors, Stored Procedures, Stored Function,
Database Triggers
04 08

-- 2 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130703
Page 3 of 3
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
6. “Understanding SQL”, Martin Gruber, BPB
7. “SQL- PL/SQL”, Ivan bayross
Course Outcomes:
Sr.
No.
CO statement Marks % weightage
CO-1 Recognize the various elements of Database Management Systems 10
CO-2 Given a problem statement, identify the entities and their relations and
draw an E-R diagram and design database applying normalization
20
CO-3 Solve the given problem using Relational Algebra, Relational Calculus,
SQL and PL/SQL
40
CO-4 Apply and relate the concepts of transaction, concurrency control,
recovery and security in database
20
CO-5 Recognize the purpose of query processing, optimization and
demonstrate the SQL query evaluation
10
List of Experiments:
1. To study DDL-create and DML-insert commands
2. Create table and insert sample data in tables.
3. Perform queries involving predicates LIKE, BETWEEN, IN etc.
4. To Perform various data manipulation commands, aggregate functions and sorting concept on
all created tables.
5. To study Single-row functions.
6. Displaying data from Multiple Tables (join)
7. To apply the concept of Aggregating Data using Group functions.
8. To solve queries using the concept of sub query.
9. To apply the concept of security and privileges
10. To study Transaction control commands
11. Write Cursor
12. Write Trigger
Major Equipment:
Computer system with DBMS system
List of Open Source Software/learning website:
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/dbms/
2. https://www.w3schools.com/sql/
3. https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-sql
4. https://in.udacity.com/

-- 3 of 3 --

