Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2023 1
Subject: Software Development Course-Code : 4361604
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (GTU)
Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2023 (COGC-2023)
Semester-VI
Course Title: Software Development
(Course Code: 4361604)
Diploma program in which this course is offered Semester in which offered
Information Technology 6th
1. RATIONALE
The world of software development is always evolving, with new technologies, tools, and approaches
emerging at a rapid pace. The software development industry continues to expand with remarkable
advancements in technology. It has revolutionized every area of human life like education, health, defense
and security, finance and business, travel, social life, politics, entertainment and so on. The list of latest and
promising software development trends includes Artificial Intelligence, Cybersecurity, Progressive Web
Applications, Block-chain Adoption, Mixed Reality, The Internet of Things (IoT), Distributed Cloud
Services, Software Outsourcing, Low-code Development, and Software Quality Standards. This course guides
the students to analyze, design, implement and test the software product with proper documentation.
2. COMPETENCY
The purpose of this course is to help the student in development of software.
Develop multiple types of skills such as planning, communication, collaboration, decision making /
Problem solving and management skills along with selected technical knowledge.
3. COURSE OUTCOMES (COs)
The practical exercises, the underpinning knowledge and the relevant soft skills associated with the
identified competency are to be developed in the student for the achievement of the following COs:
a) Select and apply appropriate process model for software project.
b) Prepare software requirement specification (SRS) document and design of the software with user
interface for a software project.
c) Organize software project development schedule.
d) Develop front end and back end coding of software project.
e) Apply testing on software product with proper test cases.
4. TEACHING AND EXAMINATION SCHEME
Teaching Scheme
(In Hours)
Total Credits
(L+T+P/2)
Examination Scheme
Theory Marks Practical Marks Total
Marks	L T P C CA ESE CA ESE
0 0 6 3 0 0 25 25 50
1. Industry Defined Project: CA will be carried out by industry resource person/project guide and ESE will
be carried out by university examiner.

-- 1 of 9 --

Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2023 2
2. User Defined Project: CA will be carried out by institute resource person/project guide and ESE will be
carried out by university examiner.
Legends: L-Lecture; T – Tutorial/Teacher Guided Theory Practice; P -Practical; C – Credit, CA -
Continuous Assessment; ESE -End Semester Examination.
5. COURSE DETAILS
Unit Major Learning
Outcomes
(in cognitive domain)
Topics and Sub-topics
Unit-I
Software
Development
Process Model
1.1. Defining the
problem definition
for the project.
1.1.1 Defining the problem definition for
the project.
1.1.2 Analysis on problem definition.
1.2 Select Software
development models for
project.
1.2.1 Software Development Models
Waterfall Model
• Incremental Model RAD Model
• Prototyping Model
• Spiral Model
• Agile Model
Unit-II
Software
analysis &
design
2.1. Identify software
requirement
2.1.1 Requirement gathering –collect
requirements from stakeholders
2.1.2 Analyze the requirements
2.2. Analyze and design
requirement
2.2.1 Analyze the requirements
2.2.2 Identify functional and non-
functional requirements for the project.
2.2.3 Prepare software design
Unit-III
Software Project
Management
3.1. Prepare and manage
Schedule for different
software development
activities
3.1.1 Estimate the size of the project.
3.1.2 Estimate the cost and development time of the project.
3.1.3 Estimate resources required for a project.
3.1.4 Prepare schedule for the project.
Unit-IV
Software
Implementation/
Coding
4.1. Develop Front end
implementation.
4.1.1 Introduction to Front end development.
4.1.2 What Front-End Developers Should Know?
4.1.3 How Front-End Communicates with the
BackEnd?
4.1.4 Most Popular Front-End Development Languages
4.2. Develop Back end
implementation.
4.2.1 Introduction to Back end development.
4.2.2 What Back-End Developers Should Know?
4.2.3 Most Popular Back-End Development Languages
Unit-V
Software
Coding and
Testing
5.1 Follow coding
standards
5.1.1 Coding standards and guidelines
5.1.2 Code review
5.2 Test the software
with proper test cases
5.2.1 Testing
– Test cases and test suit
– Verification, Validation
– Unit testing
– Black-box testing
– White-box testing

-- 2 of 9 --

Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2023 3
List of Documents to be prepared for Submission:
• Detail report duly signed and approved by the internal/external mentor/guide.
• Presentation regarding software project approved by the internal/external mentor/guide.
Poster regarding software project approved by the internal/external mentor/guide.
Common Note:
1) For Projects / Seminar etc. Evaluation is based on work done, quality of report, performance in viva-voce,
presentation etc. The internal / external assessment is based on the student’s performance in viva-voce /work
record respectively.
6. AFFECTIVE DOMAIN OUTCOMES
The following affective Domain Outcomes (ADOs) are embedded in many of the above mentioned COs.
More could be added to fulfill the development of this course competency.
a) Work as a leader/a team member as role of Engineer.
b) Practice environment friendly methods and processes.
c) Follow safety precautions and ethical practices.
7. SUGGESTED STUDENT ACTIVITIES
Following are the suggested student-related curricular, co-curricular activities which can be
undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the various outcomes in this course: Students should
perform following activities and prepare reports and give presentation in front of students and
faculty members. They should also collect/record physical evidences for their (student’s) portfolio
which may be useful for their placement interviews:
a) Perform various tasks given by industry resources person during software development in IDP projects.
b) Perform various task required to complete software development work under guidance of institute faculty
member in UDP projects.
c) Students are required to give a presentation before review committee consisting of a group of academic
staff members.
d) At the end of the software development make a poster presentation of the work carried out. The poster
presentation is open to the public. It is also evaluated by faculty members.
8. SOFTWARE / LEARNING WEBSITES
A software development is a short term work program usually offered to students by companies and
institutes who require staff for assistance at junior levels. Thus for the students undergoing software
development work are get a professional learning experience is provided to benefit them in their skills
as well as career. It will brush existing skills and provide exposure to new skills.
Here is a suggestive list for reference only.
• http://www.gksgujarat.org/
• https://anubandham.gujarat.gov.in/home
• https://kaushalyaskilluniversity.ac.in/
• https://www.internshala.com
• https://swayam.gov.in
• https://nptel.ac.in/
• https://neat.aicte-india.org/
• https://www.edx.org/
• https://www.coursera.org/

-- 3 of 9 --

Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2023 4
• https://www.udemy.com/
• https://www.linkedIn.com
• https://www.stumags.com
• https://www.glassdoor.com

-- 4 of 9 --

PO-COMPETENCY-CO MAPPING
Semester VI
Software Development (Course Code: 4361604)
POs
Competency
& Course Outcomes
PO 1
Basic &
Disciplin
e specific
knowled
ge
PO 2
Proble
m
Analy
sis
PO 3
Design/
developme
nt of
solutions
PO 4
Engineerin
g Tools,
Experimen
tation &
Testing
PO 5
Engineering
practices for
society,
sustainability
&
environment
PO 6
Project
Manageme
nt
PO 7
Life-
long
learni
ng
CO1) Select and apply
appropriate process model
for software project.
3
2 3 2
- 2 3
CO2) Prepare software
requirement
specification(SRS)
document and design of
the software with user
interface for a software
project.
3 3 3 3 - 3 3
CO3)Organize software
project development
schedule. 2 2 3 3 - 3 3
CO4) Develop front end
and back end coding of
software project. 2 3 3 3 2 3 3
CO5) Apply testing on
software product with
proper test cases. 2 2 3 3 - 3 3
Legend: ‘3’ for high, ‘2’ for medium, ‘1’ for low and ‘-’ for no correlation of each CO with PO.
9. COURSE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
Sr. No. Name and Designation Institute Email
1 Dr. Gaurang V. Lakhani,
HOD,IT, I/c Principal
G.P. Bhuj gvlakhani1@gmail.com
2 Mr. Bhavin P. Mistry,
Lecturer in I.T.
G.P. Himatnagar mistry.1987@gmail.com
3 Ms. Amisha Patel, Lecturer
in I.T.
G.P. Valsad patelamisha61@gmail.com
Sample forms for Registration and Evaluation of software project are given below:
1. Registration Form is mandatory to be filled at the commencement of software development.

-- 5 of 9 --

2. Mapping will be done to ease CA and ESE Evaluations.
3. A Seminar / Webinar can be arranged so that students coming from different industry / institute /
project background can share experiences and learnings to their peers / all students of the same
department.
4. Attached formats for Registration and Evaluation are suggestive.
Software Development Registration Form
Note: Students needs to submit this registration form after finalizing mode of software development.

-- 6 of 9 --

Student Signature Faculty Signature

-- 7 of 9 --

Software Development Evaluation Rubrics for Institute
Evaluation Rubrics (Institute)
Enrollment No: Branch: _________ Name of the Student:
Date of Evaluation:
Internal Evaluation – 25 Marks PA(I)
Parameter Excellent Good Average Not up the level of
Satisfaction Obtained
Marks
Mark 5 4 3 Below 2
Technical knowledge and awareness
related to the specific discipline.
05 marks
Attendance and punctuality during the
software development work. 05 marks
Receiving and providing feedback during
the software development work.05 marks
Team work in the organization and
adaptation capacity. 05 marks
Report writing and Presentation Skill.
05 marks
Total Marks Obtained Out of 25
PA(I)
Signature: Examiner Name:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
Enrollment No: Branch: __________ Name of the Student:
Date of Evaluation:
External Evaluation – 25 Marks ESE(V)
Parameter Excellent Good Average Not up the level of
Satisfaction
Obtained
Marks
Mark 5 4 3 Below 2
Demonstrates skills needed for
assigned tasks and effective use
of engineering tools and
techniques. (05 Marks)
Maintains professional
manner/appearance and
Manages time/resources
effectively. (05 Marks)
student attendance and
punctuality during the software
development work and
dedication towards work
assigned. (05 Marks)

-- 8 of 9 --

Understands expectations of
supervisor and seeks further
guidance when appropriate.
(05 Marks)
Quality of industrial report and
presentation skill. (05 Marks)
Total Marks Obtained Out of 25
ESE(V)
Signature: Examiner Name:

-- 9 of 9 --

