GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110001
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 1
Semester/Year : 1
Category of the Course : Basic Science
Subject Name & Code : Chemistry (3110001)
Prerequisite: Zeal to learn the subject.
Rationale: Chemistry is considered as Basic Science subject.
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching
Scheme Credits Examination
Marks
Total Marks	L T P C Theory Marks Practical Marks
ESE (E) PA (M) ESE
(V)
PA (I)
3 0 2 4 70 30 30 20 150
Contents:
Sr.
No. Topics Teaching
Hrs.
Module
Weightage
1
General Chemistry:
Introduction to Chemical Sciences, Basics includes: Periodic properties,
Effective nuclear charge, penetration of orbitals, variations of s, p, d and
f orbital energies of atoms in the periodic table, electronic
configurations, atomic and ionic sizes, ionization energies, electron
affinity and electronegativity, polarizability, oxidation states,
coordination numbers and geometries, hard soft acids and bases,
molecular geometries Structure of an Atom, Formation of molecules –
Kossel – Lewis approach to Chemical Bonding, Lewis Representations
of Simple Molecules and Ions, Types of Bonds.
5
40%
2
Water Technology:
Introduction, Sources of water, Impurities in water, Hardness of Water,
Boiler Problems, Softening of water (External & Internal treatments),
Domestic water treatments, Waste water treatments, Desalination of
Brackish water.
5

-- 1 of 5 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110001
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 2
3
Metals, Alloys and Corrosion:
Introduction, Physical properties of Metals, Definition and purpose of
alloy, Classification of alloys. Alloys: Steel, Cu, Al, Pb and its industrial
applications.
Introduction to Corrosion, Theories of corrosion, Protective
measurements against corrosion – organic and inorganic materials,
Inhibitors, Cathodic protection.
6
4
Polymers and Fibers
Introduction, Classification based on Source, Structure, Molecular
forces. Polymerization and its mechanism. Definition of Rubber, Types
of Rubber, Vulcanization of rubber. Application of Rubber.
Biodegradable Polymers, Commercially important polymers- PE, PP,
PS, PVC, ABS, PMMA, Glyptal and their uses.
Types of fibers – Natural, semi synthetic, synthetic fibers. Physical
properties of fibers and uses of Cellulose acetate, Viscose Rayon,
Nylon,Polyesters acrylic, Glass fibers and Liquid Crystals.
7 40%
5
Nano material:
Introduction, Sources, Properties and application of fullerenes,
fullerols, Metal based nanoparticles, Carbon nanotubes and nanowires.
Synthesis: Top down and Bottom up approaches, Nanoelectronics.
Applications of nanomaterial in catalysis, textile and medicine.
5
6
Fuel and Combustion: Definition, Types of fuel and their applications.
Calorific Value, Characteristics of good fuel. Analysis of coal – ultimate
and proximate analysis, LPG, Natural gas, Biogas, Refining of
Petroleum by Fractional distillation, Octane and Cetane Number,
Unleaded Petrol and Diesel.
5

-- 2 of 5 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110001
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 3
7
Chemical aspect of Biotechnology:
Introduction, Scope, importance and application, Benefits through
biotechnology – Agriculture, Food quality, Medicines, Fermentation
processes: Preparation of Ethanol and Acetic acid, Enzymes and its
application in industries, Importance of Biofuels, Bio fertilizers, Bio
surfactants and Bioreactors.
5
20%
8
Analytical Techniques: Measurement and understanding of pH,
Conductance, and Potential, Spectroscopic techniques: Principles of
Spectroscopy and Selection rules. UV-Visible Spectroscopy and its
Application, Vibrational and Rotational spectroscopy (IR) of diatomic
molecules and its application.
4
Suggested Specification table with Marks (Theory) : (For BE only)
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
10 50 10 30 0 0
Legends: R: Remembrance; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E:
Evaluate C:Create and above Levels (Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)

-- 3 of 5 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110001
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 4
Reference Books :
1. Engineering Chemistry by Jain and Jain, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Co.
2. Engineering Chemistry Willey India Publisher
3. Engineering Chemistry by Marry Jane & Shultz, Cencage Learning Publisher
4. Engineering Chemistry by N. Krishnamurthy, P. Vallinaygam and D. Madhavan,
Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd.
5. Engineering Chemistry by K. Sesha Maheswaramma and Mridula Chugh,
Pearson IndiaEducation Pvt Ltd.
6. Engineering Chemistry by B K. Sharma, Krishna Prakashan Media (P) Ltd.
7. A textbook of Engineering Chemistry by Shashi Chawla, Dhanpatrai Publishing Co. Ltd.
8. Fundamentals of Biotechnology by B D Singh, Kalyani Publisher. New Delhi.
9. Essential of Physical Chemistry by Bahl and Tuli., S Chand & Co. Ltd, New Delhi.
10. Introduction to Nano Science by N N. Lindsay, Oxford University Press.
11. NANO: The Essentials by T Pradeep Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi.
Course Outcome :
Sr.
No.
CO statement Marks % weightage
CO-1 Relate periodic properties such as ionization potential, oxidation
states and electro negativity.
15
CO-2 Analyze microscopic chemistry in terms of atomic and molecular
orbital’s and inter molecular forces.
10
CO-3 Describe the importance and relevance of chemistry in our everyday
life
10
CO-4 Select the appropriate chemical material and utilization of it. 50
CO-5 Interpret the methods of science as a logical means of problem
solving
10
CO-6 Distinguish the ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum used for
exciting different molecular energy levels in various spectroscopic
techniques.
5
LIST OF PRACTICALS: (Minimum 8 to be performed.)
1. Analysis of Steel Sample.
2. Analysis of Pyrolusite Ore.
3. Analysis of Brass Alloy.
4. Estimation of Hardness.
5. Gravimetric Analysis of decomposition of Na2CO3 & NaHCO3.
6. Determination of Concentration of Unknown Solution Spectrophotometrically.
7. To study Wet Corrosion loss of Steel by weight loss method using electrochemical theory.
8. Stress Corrosion Cracking of Brass in NH3 Solution.
9. To determine Alkalinity of a given Water Sample.

-- 4 of 5 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING SYLLABUS
1st Year, Subject Code : 3110001
https://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 5
10. Determination of Saponification Value of Oil.
11. Determination of chloride content of water
12. Study of decomposition reaction of ZnCO3 by Gravimetric analysis.
13. To determine the moisture content in coal.
Reference Books :
1. Laboratory Manual of Engineering Chemistry, by S K. Bhasin
& Sudha Rani.Publisher: Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company Ltd.
2. Engineering Chemistry with Laboratory Experiments, by
M S. Kaurav.Publisher: PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. New
Delhi.
3. Vogel’s textbook of Quantitative Chemical Analysis, by Arthur I Vogel, Revised
by Jeffery etal, Publisher: Addison Wesley, Longman Ltd, England
4. Engineering Chemistry with Laboratory Experiments, by R. P. Mani &
Mishra, Publisher:Cen cage Publisher.
Major Equipment :
1. Spectrophotometer.
2. Laboratory Oven.
3. Melting Point Instrument.
4. Electronic Balance
List of Open Source Software/learning website :
NPTEL, World Wide Web, etc.

-- 5 of 5 --

