GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : BE01000061
Course / Subject Name : Engineering Graphics & Design
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 1 | 3
w. e. f. Academic Year: 2024-25
Semester: Ist Year
Category of the Course: Engineering Science
Prerequisite: Zeal to learn the subject
Rationale: Engineering Drawing is an effective language of engineers. It is the foundation
block which strengthens the engineering & technological structure. Moreover, it is
the transmitting link between ideas and realization.
Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No Course Outcomes RBT level
1 Apply the conventions and the methods of engineering drawing also interpret
engineering drawings
Application
2 Construct basic and intermediate geometry and comprehend the theory of
projection.
Application
3 Dissect the objects in three dimensions with different orientation. Analyze
4 Make use of computer software for engineering drawings. Application
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme
(in Hours)
Total
Credits
L+T+
(PR/2)
Assessment Pattern and Marks
Total
Marks
L T PR C
Theory Tutorial / Practical
ESE
(E)
PA / CA
(M) PA/CA (I) ESE (V)
1 0 2 2 70 30 20 30 150
Course Content:
Unit
No. Content No. of
Hours
% of
Weightage
1. Introduction to Engineering Graphics: Drawing instruments and
accessories, BIS – SP 46. Use of plane scales, Diagonal Scales and
Representative Fraction.
* 10

-- 1 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : BE01000061
Course / Subject Name : Engineering Graphics & Design
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 2 | 3
2. Engineering Curves: Classification and application of Engineering
Curves, Construction of Conics, Cycloidal Curves, Involutes andSpirals
* 10
3. Projections of Points and Lines: Introduction to principal planes of
projections, Projections of the points located in same quadrant and
different quadrants, Projections of line with its inclination to one
reference plane and with two reference planes. True length and
inclination with the reference planes.
4 18
4. Projections of Planes: Projections of planes (polygons, circle and
ellipse) with its inclination to one reference plane and with two
reference planes
2 16
5. Projections of Solids, Section of Solids: Classification of solids.
Projections of solids (Cylinder, Cone, Pyramid and Prism) along with
frustum with its inclination to one reference plane and with two
reference planes, Section of such solids and the true shape of the
section.
6 18
6. Orthographic Projections: Fundamental of projection along with
classification, Projections from the pictorial view of the object on the
principal planes for view from front, top and sides using first angle
projection method and third angle projection method, full sectional
view.
3 18
7. Computer Aided Drawing:
Introduction to AutoCAD, Basic commands for 2D drawing like :
Line, Circle, Polyline, Rectangle, Hatch, Fillet, Chamfer, Trim, Extend,
Offset, Dim style, etc.
*
Total 15 100
* Chapter/Topics must be taught during laboratory sessions.
Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
25 30 30 15 - -
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per
Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)
References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
1. A Text Book of Engineering Graphics by P.J.Shah S.Chand & Company Ltd., New Delhi.
10

-- 2 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: All
Course / Subject Code : BE01000061
Course / Subject Name : Engineering Graphics & Design
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 3 | 3
2. Elementary Engineering Drawing by N.D.Bhatt Charotar Publishing House, Anand.
3. A text book of Engineering Drawing by R.K.Dhawan, S.Chand & Company Ltd., New Delhi.
4. A text book of Engineering Drawing by P.S.Gill, S.K.Kataria & sons, Delhi.
5. Engineering Drawing by B. Agrawal and C M Agrawal, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi.
(b) Open-source software and website:
1. AutoCAD
Suggested Course Practical List:
Students must prepare sketch book and drawing sheets on the following topics.
1. Practice sheet (which includes dimensioning methods, different types of line, construction
of different polygon, divide the line and angle in parts, use of stencil) – 2 Hrs.
2. Plane scale and diagonal scale – 2 Hrs.
3. Engineering curves- 4 Hrs.
4. Projection of point and line – 4 Hrs.
5. Projection of plane – 4 Hrs.
6. Projection of solid, section of solid - 4 Hrs.
7. Orthographic projection – 6 Hrs.
8. At least one orthographic drawing (three views) using above mentioned AutoCAD commands.
– 4 Hrs.
List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
Suggested Project List:
1. Students must prepare at least one model using cardboard/paper to understand the fundamentals
of topic no. 1 to 6. This project work will be considered for practical evaluation.
* * * * * * *

-- 3 of 3 --

