w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 1 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
w. e. f. Academic Year: 2024-25
Semester: Ist Year
Category of the Course: ESC
Prerequisite: NA
Rationale: Electricity has been the main source of energy for the developing and developed
countries. Per capita consumption of electricity of a country can be considered as
an indicator of the development of the country. In view of this, it is essential for all
engineering graduates to know the basic aspects of electrical engineering. This
subject deals with basic circuit solution methods, introduction to electrical
machines and basics of domestic electrical installations.
Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No Course Outcomes RBT Level
01 Apply fundamental electrical laws and circuit theorems to electrical circuits. Application
02 Analyze single phase and three phase AC circuits. Analyze
03 Describe operating principle and applications of static and rotating electrical
machines.
Understand
04 Understand the wiring methods, electricity billing, and working principles of
circuits protective devices and personal safety measures.
Read &
Understand
05 Understand the electrical safety and purpose, types and scope of earthing
systems
Read &
Understand
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching / Learning Scheme
(in Hours per semester) Total
Credits
=
TH/30
Assessment Pattern and Marks
Total
Marks
L T P TW/SL TH
Theory Tutorial / Practical
ESE
(E)
PA
(M)
PA/
(I)
TW/
SL (I)
ESE
(V)
45 0 30 45 120 04 70 30 20 30 50 200
Where L = Lecture, T= Tutorial, P= Practical, TW/SL = Term-Work / Self-Learning, TH = Total Hours, PA = Progressive
Assessment, ESE = End-Semester Examination

-- 1 of 6 --

w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 2 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
Course Content:
Unit
No. Content No. of
Hours
% of
Weightage
1. DC Circuits:
Electrical circuit elements (R, L and C), voltage and current independent
sources, Kirchoff’s current and voltage laws, analysis of simple circuits
with dc excitation, Superposition, Thevenin and Norton Theorems, Star-
delta/Delta-Star conversion, Time-domain analysis of first-order RL and
RC circuits.
7 15
2. AC Circuits
Representation of sinusoidal waveforms, peak, RMS and average values
of different signals, form factor and peak factor, Phasor representation
of AC quantities, real power, reactive power, apparent power, power
factor.
Analysis of single-phase ac circuits consisting of R, L, C, RL, RC, RLC
combinations (series and parallel), Series and parallel resonances, Three
phase balanced circuits, voltage and current relations in star and delta
connections, Power measurement in three phase balanced circuits.
9 20
3. Magnetic Circuits & Transformers
Magnetic effect of electrical current, cross and dot convention, right hand
thumb rule and cork screw rule, Concepts of m.m.f, flux, flux density,
reluctance, permeability and field strength, Analogy between electric and
magnetic circuits, Magnetic Circuits, B-H Curve, Hysteresis Loop,
Hysteresis and Eddy current losses, Construction and working principle
of single-phase transformers: Construction, principle of working, voltage
and current ratios, losses, definition of regulation and efficiency, Ideal
and practical transformer.
8 15
4. Fundamentals of Electrical Machines
Generation of rotating magnetic fields, Construction and working of
Single-phase induction motors (Split phase, Capacitor start, Permanent
split capacitor, Capacitor start/capacitor run).
Single phase induction motor applications: pumps, refrigerators, fans,
compressors, and portable drills.
Construction and working of brushless DC motors and its application:
Electrical Vehicle, washing machines, Blowers, Computers/Laptops
9 20

-- 2 of 6 --

w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 3 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
5. Electrical Wiring and Installations
Components of LT Switchgear: Switch Fuse Unit (SFU), MCB,
ELCB, MCCB.
Types of lamps, fixtures & reflectors, illumination schemes for
domestic, industrial & commercial premises, Lumen requirements for
different categories.
Earthing – Types of earthing and its importance.
Safety precautions for electrical appliances.
Types of Batteries, Characteristics of Batteries (Voltage, storage
capacity, discharge curve, cycle life).
Elementary calculations for energy consumption of home appliances
and electricity bill.
Basic electrical measurements with Ammeter, Voltmeter, Wattmeter
and Energy meter (working principle and circuit connection).
12 30
Total 45 100
Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
40 20 20 20 0 0
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per Revised
Bloom’s Taxonomy)
References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
1) D. C. Kulshreshtha, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, McGraw Hill, 2009.
2) Basic Electrical Engineering - Nagsarkar and Sukhija, Oxford University Press
3) B. L. Theraja, “Electrical Technology – Part I and II”, S. Chand and Co. 2012
4) D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2010.
5) J. B. Gupta “ Basic Electrical Engineering”, S.K. Kataria & Sons,2023.
6) A Chakrabarti,S Nath and C K Chanda ”Basic Electrical Engineering”,TATA McGraw Hill,
7) S.L. Uppal “Electrical Wiring Estimating and Costing”, Khanna Publisher, 1987
8) Irving M. Gottlieb “"Practical Electric Motor Handbook"Newnes,1997
9) L. S. Bobrow, “Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering”, Oxford University Press, 2011.
10) E. Hughes, “Electrical and Electronics Technology”, Pearson, 2010.
11) V. D. Toro, “Electrical Engineering Fundamentals”, Prentice Hall India, 1989.

-- 3 of 6 --

w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 4 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
Open source software and website:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/
Suggested Course Practical List:
1) Introduction of Resistors, Capacitors and Inductors and usage of measuring instruments – voltmeter,
ammeter, multi-meter, oscilloscope.
2) To verify the Kirchoff’s current and Kirchoff’s voltage laws.
3) To verify the Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems.
4) To verify Superposition’s theorems
5) To obtain sinusoidal steady state response of R-L and R-C circuits – impedance calculation and
verification phasor relationships between voltage and current and to observe the phase differences
between current and voltage phasors
6) To obtain steady-state and transient time-response of R-L, R-C, and R-L-C circuits to a step change
in DC input voltage (transient may be observed on a Digital Storage Oscilloscope)
7) To verify the phasor relationships between currents and voltages for resonances in R-L-C circuits
8) To measure the power in three phase balanced circuits using two wattmeter method
9) To verify the current phasor and voltage phasor relationships in three phase star and delta
connections
10) Demonstration of cut-section models and charts of various machines
11) Demonstration of domestic switch gears like MCB, ELCB, MCCB etc. of different ratings
12) Understanding of various safety precautions for electrical installations
13) Demonstration of various types of wires, fuses and cables
14) To Calculate energy consumption of various appliances and house hold electricity bills
15) To verify the power factor improvement in single phase AC circuit
16) Study the different types of domestic wiring
17) To obtain Hysteresis loop of a magnetic material on CRO/DSO
List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
Ammeters, Voltmeters, Wattmeters, Resistors, Capacitors and Inductors of appropriate rating. Multimeters,
Digital storage oscilloscope, Cut section models/charts of various machines, Demo units for MCB, ELCB,
MCCB etc, Samples of wires and cables. Charts for earthing and safety precautions.
 Self-Learning Activity
Total Self-Learning Hours: 45
No. Activity Name Units
Mapped
Hours Brief Description Evaluation Criteria
1 Technical
Video-Based
Learning
Unit 1, 2, 3 10 (5+5) Watch curated videos (e.g.,
NPTEL/MIT OCW) on DC
circuits, AC power,
Report + Oral
Presentation

-- 4 of 6 --

w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 5 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
Transformers. Submit a
reflective report.
2 Numerical
Assignment
Writing
Unit 1, 2, 3 10 (5 × 2h) Solve 5 numerical
assignments covering
Theorems, Power factor, AC
analysis, and Transformer
calculations.
Correctness,
method, clarity
3 Simulation &
Problem
Solving Using
Software
(Scilab,
Tinkercad,
LTSpice)
Unit 1, 2, 3 10 (5 × 2h) Simulate basic circuits
(RLC, transformer
equivalent), transient
analysis, and AC load
behavior.
Report +
Screenshot +
Output sheet
4 Case Study:
Domestic
Wiring &
Electricity
Billing
Unit 5 5 (2.5+2.5) Study household wiring
layout and energy bills.
Estimate load, usage, and
suggest efficiency
improvements.
Report + Practical
Recommendations
5 Poster / PPT
Preparation
Unit 4, 5 4 Topic examples: “BLDC
Motor in EV”, “Earthing
Methods”, “Difference
between MCB & MCCB”
Technical clarity +
Visual appeal +
Presentation
6 Group
Discussion /
Seminar on
Electrical
Safety &
Earthing
Unit 5 2 Discuss safety norms, role of
protective devices, and
earthing types.
Technical depth,
articulation
7 Online
Technical Quiz
/ Interactive
Simulation
(Electrical4U /
vlab.co.in)
Unit 1 to 5 2 Attempt at least 3 online
quizzes with screenshot of
scores and a 100-word
learning reflection.
Quiz scores +
Reflection Note
8 Maintenance /
Troubleshooting
Logbook (Lab
Based)
Unit 1, 2, 4,
5
2 Record at least 5 issues
encountered during lab
sessions and how they were
resolved.
Clarity of issue,
resolution steps
9 Annotated
Concept Video
Unit 2, 3 Extra
(Optional 5)
Make a 5–6 minute video
explaining topics like phasor
Clarity, technical
accuracy,

-- 5 of 6 --

w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ 	P a g e 6 | 6
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code: BE01R00051
Course / Subject Name: Basic Electrical Engineering
(Optional –
Higher Bloom’s
level)
relationships or transformer
working.
originality
Unit-Wise Mapping of Self-Learning Activities
Unit Topic Relevant Activities
1 DC Circuits Activities 1, 2, 3, 7, 8
2 AC Circuits Activities 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9
3 Magnetic Circuits & Transformers Activities 1, 2, 3, 9
4 Electrical Machines Activities 1, 5, 8
5 Electrical Wiring, Safety & Billing Activities 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Note:
 All the suggested activity should be related to the subject.
 The number of hours is suggestive. Faculty can sub-divide the number of hours based on the activity.However,
total number of hours is fixed.
 Rubrics for the evaluation can be prepared by the faculty.
 All records pertaining to the evaluation and assessment of self-learning activities must be properlymaintained and
preserved at the institute level. These records should be made available to the universityupon request.
 Institutes are encouraged to utilize digital platforms, such as Microsoft Teams, for effective record-keeping and to
ensure transparency in the evaluation and assessment of self-learning activities.
* * * * * * *

-- 6 of 6 --

