Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 1 of 12
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (GTU)
Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2021 (COGC-2021)
I– Semester
Course Title: COMMUNICATION SKILLS IN ENGLISH
(Course Code: 4300002)
Diploma programme in which this course is offered Semester in which offered
ALL BRANCHES FIRST
1. RATIONALE
Language is the most commonly used medium of self-expression in all spheres of human life
– personal, social and professional. English language has become a dire need to deal
successfully in the globalized and competitive market. Competency in English is need of the
hour, not only for Indian industry, but also worldwide, where diploma engineers have the
employable opportunity. Therefore, the basic English skills- listening, speaking, reading and
writing have become almost mandatory for employability. This course intends to make the
students to develop comprehension skills, improve vocabulary, use proper grammar, acquire
writing skills, correspond with others and enhance skills in spoken English. Further, it is
expected that each polytechnic will provide conducive environment for acquiring proficiency
in communication skills among the students through English language.
2. COMPETENCY
The purpose of this course is to help the student to attain the following industry identified
competency through various teaching learning experiences:
 Use reading, writing, speaking, listening skills to communicate effectively in English
3. COURSE OUTCOMES (COs)
The practical exercises, the underpinning knowledge and the relevant soft skills associated
with the identified competency are to be developed in the student for the achievement of
the following COs:
 Use strategies to minimise barriers of effective communication.
 Construct grammatically correct sentences.
 Develop reading and listening skills in terms of fluency and comprehensibility.
 Compose different types of written communication.
 Communicate orally in a given situation with a purpose.
4. TEACHING AND EXAMINATION SCHEME
Teaching Scheme
(In Hours)
Total Credits
(L+T+P/2)
Examination Scheme
Theory Marks Practical Marks Total
Marks	L T P C CA ESE CA ESE
2 - 2 3 30* 70 25 25 150
(*): Out of 30 marks under the theory CA, 10 marks are for assessment of the micro-project
to facilitate integration of COs and the remaining 20 marks is the average of 2 tests to be

-- 1 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 2 of 12
taken during the semester for the assessing the attainment of the cognitive domain UOs
required for the attainment of the COs.
Legends: L-Lecture; T – Tutorial/Teacher Guided Theory Practice; P - Practical; C – Credit, CA -
Continuous Assessment; ESE - End Semester Examination.
5. SUGGESTED PRACTICAL EXERCISES
The following practical outcomes (PrOs) are the sub-components of the COs. Some of the
PrOs marked ‘*’ are compulsory, as they are crucial for that particular CO. These PrOs need
to be attained at least at the ‘Precision Level’ of Dave’s Taxonomy related to ‘Psychomotor
Domain’.
S.
No. Practical Outcomes (PrOs) Unit
No.
Approx.
Hrs.
required
1 Make correct sentences using tenses. II
Any
two
02
2 Compose Syntactical statements in written and Oral
Communication (especially Formal Communication).
II 02
3 Make meaningful sentences using confusing words.. II 02
4 Develop listening skills through listening to recorded
lectures, poems, interviews and speeches.
III 02*
5 Use antonyms and synonyms effectively in oral and
written forms.
III,
IV
02*
6 Use grammatically correct sentence IV 01
7 Communicate ideas effectively and fluently in oral and
written communication.
IV,
V
02*
8 Apply idioms and one word substitute effectively in oral
and written forms of communication.
IV,
V
01
9 Articulate vowels, consonants and diphthongs correctly. V 02*
10 Syllable and Syllable Stress V 02
11 Speak with appropriate intonation, voice modulation,
pitch, speed and volume.
V 02
12 Participate in conversations (GD /meetings etc.) V 02*
13 Deliver the presentation effectively in the class. V 02*
14 Communicate effectively through verbal and non-verbal
means of communication.
V 02*
15 Practice online exercises for listening and reading
comprehension.
V 02*
16 Perform role play and mock interview V 02
Total 28
Note
i. More Practical Exercises can be designed and offered by the respective course teacher to
develop the industry relevant skills/outcomes to match the COs. The above table is only a
suggestive list.
ii. The following are some sample ‘Process’ and ‘Product’ related skills (more may be
added/deleted depending on the course) that occur in the above listed Practical Exercises
of this course required which are embedded in the COs and ultimately the competency.

-- 2 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 3 of 12
Oral Communication
Each student performance will be evaluated on the basis of the sample Performance
Indicators given below:
S. No. Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs
(Oral communication)
Weightage in %
1 Pronunciation 20
2 Use of language (simple or decorated language) 20
3 Syntax (Sub-Verb Agreement, types of sentences, Modals
etc.)
20
4 Use of appropriate Vocabulary 15
5 Fluency ( Ease and speed of the flow of speech ) 15
6 Audibility 10
Total 100
Written Communication
Each student performance will be evaluated on the basis of the sample Performance
Indicators given below:
S.No. Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs
(Written communication)
Weightage in %
1 Content(ideas expressed ) 25
2 Use of language (Organisation of the content ) 20
3 Grammar
 Syntax (Sub-Verb Agreement)
 Diction (choice and use of words)
 Control of the basic grammatical patterns
20
4 Style
 Choice of sentence structures
 Use of appropriate sentence structures
20
5 Mechanics (Use of punctuations, Capitalization,
paragraphing, italicizing)
15
Total 100
Listening skills
Each student performance will be evaluated on the basis of the sample Performance
Indicators given below:
S.No. Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs
(Listening skills)
Weightage in %
1 Enthusiasm for patient listening 15
2 Attentive listening 20
3
After listening, each student has to summarize
 Accuracy of facts and figures.
 Description of places and situations.
40
4 Para- phrasing of the listened texts. 25
Total 100

-- 3 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 4 of 12
Reading Skills
Each student performance will be evaluated on the basis of the sample Performance
Indicators given below:
S.No. Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs
(Reading Skills)
Weightage in %
1 Reading correctly with clarity 30
2 Correct pronunciation 20
3 Comprehension of a vocabulary and deriving meaning of
information
15
4 Reading speed 20
5 Drawing correct conclusion and valid inference 15
Total 100
6. MAJOR EQUIPMENT/ INSTRUMENTS AND SOFTWARE REQUIRED
These major equipment/instruments and Software required to develop PrOs are given below
with broad specifications to facilitate procurement of them by the
administrators/management of the institutes. This will ensure conduction of practical in all
institutions across the state in proper way so that the desired skills are developed in
students.
S.
No. Equipment Name with Broad Specifications PrO. No.
1 Computer systems windows 7 or above with internet connectivity All
2 Headphones with speakers All
3 LCD Projector All
4 Language lab software All
7. AFFECTIVE DOMAIN OUTCOMES
The following sample Affective Domain Outcomes (ADOs) are embedded in many of the
above mentioned COs and PrOs. More could be added to fulfill the development of this
course competency.
a) Work well as a leader/a team member.
b) Follow ethics
c) Demonstrate human concern.
The ADOs are best developed through the laboratory/field based exercises. Moreover, the
level of achievement of the ADOs according to Krathwohl’s ‘Affective Domain Taxonomy’
should gradually increase as planned below:
i. ‘Valuing Level’ in 1st year
ii. ‘Organization Level’ in 2nd year.
iii. ‘Characterization Level’ in 3rd year.

-- 4 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 5 of 12
8. UNDERPINNING THEORY
The major underpinning theory is given below based on the UOs of Revised Bloom’s
taxonomy that are formulated for development of the COs and competency. If required,
more such UOs could be included by the course teacher to focus on attainment of COs and
competency.
Unit Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub topics
Writing Skills Speaking Skills
Unit 1
Theory of
Communi-
cation
1a. Define the
theory of
communication
1b. State different
types of
communication.
1c. Explain barriers
in
communication
1d. Communicate
effectively
1.1 Concept of effective
communication and
communication skills
1.2 Basic communication
model(S+M+C+R+F)
1.3 Types of
communication
1.4 Barriers of effective
communication
Unit 2
Grammar
2a. Identify different
parts of speech
and their usage
in the sentence.
2f. Choose appropriate
parts of speech for
day to day
communication.
2.1 Parts of Speech
Noun, Pronoun, Verb,
Adjective, Adverb and
Interjection- Meaning
and Examples
(Recapitulation)
Prepositions- In, into,
On, At, for, Since,
between, among, to,
towards
Connectors - If, Unless,
Otherwise, Because,
Therefore, Who, Which,
Where, When, Why.
2b. Apply correct
verbs in the
given sentence
2g. Use grammatically
correct sentence in
day to day
communication
2.2 Tenses
2.2.1 Present Tense
(Simple, Continuous,
Perfect, Perfect
Continuous)
2.2.2 Past Tense
(Simple, Continuous,
Perfect)
2.2.3 Future Tense
(Simple)
2c. Use appropriate
Modal
Auxiliaries
in a given
expression.
2h. Choose appropriate
Modals in situations
where different
modes of
expressions are
used.
2.3 Modal Auxiliaries
(Can, Could, May,
Might, Shall, Should,
Will, Would, Must, Have
to, Ought to)

-- 5 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 6 of 12
Unit Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub topics
Writing Skills Speaking Skills
2d. Choose the
correct verb for
the given
subject.
2i. Use the correct verb
depending on the
subject in a
sentence.
2.4 Subject- Verb
Agreement
2e. Identify basic
sentence
patterns of
English and form
sentences in
correct word
order.
2j. Use correct word
order in their
speech.
2.5 Basic Sentence
Patterns of English
(Explanation of S,
V,O,A,C)
S-Subject, V-Verb, O-
Object, A-Adverbial and
C- Complement
Four Basic Sentence
Patterns
 S+V
 S+V+O
 S+V+A
 S+V+C
Unit 3
Prose and
Poetry
3a. Realise the
central idea of
the literary
piece.
3b. Formulate
sentences using
new words.
3c. Enrich
vocabulary
through reading.
3d. Write short as
well as long
answers to
questions.
3e. Express ideas in
English in written
form effectively
3f. Explain the content
of the passage/story
in the class.
3g. Ask appropriate
questions as well to
answer them.
3h. Follow oral
instructions and
interpret them to
others.
3i. Present topics
effectively and
clearly.
3j. Use dictionary,
thesaurus and other
reference books.
3k. Describe an object
or product.
3l. Use correct
pronunciation and
intonation.
3m. Give instructions
orally.
3.1. Prose
The Leopard- Ruskin
Bond
3.2. Short Story
After Twenty Years- O
Henry
3.3. Poetry
 Stopping by
Woods on Snowy
Evening-Robert
Frost
 Where the Mind is
Without Fear-
Rabindranath
Tagore
3.4 Language components:
Language components
should be integrated with:
 Passages from text
book/Work book.
 Unseen passages
Reading with correct
pronunciation.

-- 6 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 7 of 12
Unit Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub topics
Writing Skills Speaking Skills
3.5 Vocabulary Items:
 Matching items
(Word and its
Meaning)
 One-Word
Substitution
 Phrases and Idioms
 Synonyms and
Antonyms
Unit 4
Techniques
of Writing
4a. Compose emails
on given topics/
situations.
4b. Write a
paragraph in
words with
synchronized
sentence
structure on the
given situation /
topic.
4c. Answer the
questions on the
given unseen
passage.
4d. Summarize the
given unseen
passage .
4e. Face oral
examinations and
interviews.
4f. Grasp the main idea
of any conversation
and communicate
accordingly.
4.1 Email Writing
(Business)
Format and Sample
Enquiry, Orders and
complaints
Examples for Practice
4.2 Letter writing
 Types of letters,
 Formats of Letters
 Qualities of a good
letter
 Sample letters such
as:
- Job applications/
Cover Letter
- Leave applications,
Complaints,
- Purchase orders,
Enquiries replies
etc.
Unit 5
Mechanics
of Speaking
5a. Develop a
welcome and
farewell speech for
the given theme/
situation.
5b. Prepare a speech
for introducing a
guest in the
given situation.
5c. Make a
weather report
for the given
condition .
5d. Introduce oneself
with correct
pronunciation,
intonation, using
verbal and non-
verbal gestures.
5e. Speak in specified
formal situations
with correct
pronunciation.
5f. Speak in specified
informal situations
with correct
5.1 Public speaking
 Basics of Speaking
 Importance of public
speaking
 Characteristics of good
speech
5.2 Samples for Practice:
 Welcome speech
 Farewell speech
 Introducing oneself
and another.
 Discussing Weather
 Disposal of E -Waste

-- 7 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 8 of 12
Unit Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub topics
Writing Skills Speaking Skills
pronunciation.  Environmental
protection through
non-use of Plastic
 Reduction of Noise
pollution by vehicles.
 Conversation with the
Cashier- College/ bank
 Telephonic
Conversations (Formal
and Informal).
9. SUGGESTED SPECIFICATION TABLE FOR QUESTIONPAPER DESIGN
Unit
No.
Unit Title Teaching
Hours
Distribution of Theory Marks
R
Level
U
Level
A Total
Marks
I Theory of Communication 04 03 04 03 10
II Grammar 10 07 14 06 27
III Prose and Poetry 09 04 07 08 19
IV Techniques of Writing 05 03 04 07 14
V Mechanics of Speaking 0 - - - -
Total 28 17 29 24 70
Legends: R=Remember, U=Understand, A=Apply and above (Revised Bloom’s taxonomy)
Note: This specification table provides general guidelines to assist students for their learning
and to teachers to teach and question paper designers/setters to formulate test
items/questions to assess the attainment of the UOs. The actual distribution of marks at
different taxonomy levels (of R, U and A) in the question paper may slightly vary from above
table.
10 SUGGESTED STUDENT ACTIVITIES
Other than the classroom and laboratory learning, following are the suggested student-
related co-curricular activities which can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the
various outcomes in this course: Students should perform following activities in group and
prepare reports of about 5 pages for each activity. They should also collect/record physical
evidences for their (student’s) portfolio which may be useful for their placement interviews:
 The experiments should be properly designed and implemented with an attempt to
develop different types of skills leading to the achievement of the competency.
 Initiating a conversation with a new comer to your college.
 Assignments using Internet. (Online Listening/Speaking/Vocabulary based exercises
and uploading their score, etc. (Teacher can decide how to use various online
platforms for evaluation purpose.

-- 8 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 9 of 12
 Self-learning Activities using mobile apps/internet
 Discuss current affairs in English with your friends.
 Read storybooks and learn new words and sentence structures.
 Write a brief report on current environmental issues.
11. SUGGESTED SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES (if any)
These are sample strategies, which the teacher can use to accelerate the attainment of the
various outcomes in this course:
a) Massive open online courses (MOOCs) may be used to teach various topics/sub
topics.
b) Guide student(s) in undertaking micro-projects.
c) Comprehension of passage and making presentation can given to the students for
self-learning, but to be assessed using different assessment methods.
d) Guide students on how to address issues on environment and sustainability using the
knowledge of this course
12. SUGGESTED MICRO-PROJECTS
Only one micro-project is planned to be undertaken by a student that needs to be assigned
to him/her in the beginning of the semester. In the first four semesters, the micro-project are
group-based (group of 3 to 5). However, in the fifth and sixth semesters, the number of
students in the group should not exceed three.
The micro-project could be industry application based, internet-based, workshop-
based, laboratory-based or field-based. Each micro-project should encompass two or more
COs which are in fact, an integration of PrOs, UOs and ADOs. Each student will have to
maintain dated work diary consisting of individual contribution in the project work and give a
seminar presentation of it before submission. The duration of the microproject should be
about 14-16 (fourteen to sixteen) student engagement hours during the course. The
students ought to submit micro-project by the end of the semester to develop the industry-
oriented COs.
A suggestive list of micro-projects is given here. This should relate highly with
competency of the course and the COs.Similar micro-projects could be added by the
concerned course teacher:
a) Book review – students should read a book and then write his reviews about the
book and present it in the class.
b) Presentation – Prepare a presentation regarding current problems of environment
and present it in the class,
c) Mock interviews. – Interviews conducted by students and for the students.
d) Skit or role play- write the script and present it in the class
( can be asked to take topic related to environment and pollution)
e) Find out 20 new words out of a given story, write its synonym and use the word in
your own sentence.
f) Draft a story according to a given picture.
g) You are in the village fair. Describe what is happening around you in present
continuous tense. (Celebration of Annual Day – past tense. etc)
h) Write a paragraph about your first day in college.

-- 9 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 10 of 12
13. SUGGESTED LEARNING RESOURCES
S.
No. Title of Book Author Publication with place, year and ISBN
1 Living English Structures W. S. Allen Pearson Education India 1992
ISBN: 9788131728499
2 Essentials of English
Grammar and Composition
N. K. Aggrawal Goyal Brothers Prakashan 2015
ISBN : 8183896162
3 English Grammar at Glance M. Gnanamurali S. Chand & Co. Ltd. 2010
ISBN : 9788121929042
4 Effective English E. Suresh Kumar
& Others
Pearson 2010
ISBN : 9788131731000
5 English Communication for
Polytechnics
S.
Chandrashekhar
& Others
Orient BlackSwan 2013
ISBN : 8125037462
6 English Fluency Step 1 & 2 - Macmillan 2010
ISBN : 9781405003650
9781405003667
7 Active English Dictionary - Longman 1991
ISBN : 8131707865
8 The Pronunciation of English Daniel Jones Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 4th Edition 1956
ISBN : 0521093694
9 Ed. English Pronouncing
Dictionary
James Hartman
& et al.
Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.17th Edition 2006
ISBN : 0521680867
10 Effective Communication
Skills
Kulbhushan
Kumar
Khanna Publishing House, New
Delhi (Revised Ed. 2018)
ISBN : 9789382609940
11 Better English Pronunciation J.D.O’Connor Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 1982
ISBN : 0521231523
12 An English Grammar:
Comprehending Principles
and Rules
Lindley Murray Franklin Classics (10 October 2018).
ISBN : 0342097008
13 Examine your English Margaret M.
Maison
Orient Longman: New Delhi, 1964
ISBN : 812500176X
14 A Practice Course in English
Pronunciation
J.Sethi & et al New Delhi: Prentice Hall, 2004
ISBN : 9788120325944
15 Technical Communication: A
Practical Approach.
Pfeiffer, William
Sanborn and
T.V.S Padmaja
Delhi: Pearson, 2007.
ISBN : 9788131700884

-- 10 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 11 of 12
14. SUGGESTED LEARNING WEBSITES
 https://learnenglish.britishcouncil.org
 http://www.free-english-study.com/
 http://www.english-online.org.uk/course.htm
 http://www.english-online.org.uk/
 http://www.talkenglish.com/
 http://www.learnenglish.de/
 https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/linguaskill/
 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/
 https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/academic/
 https://learnenglishkids.britishcouncil.org/
15. PO-COMPETENCY-CO MAPPING
Legend: ‘3’ for high, ‘2’ for medium, ‘1’ for low and ‘-’ for no correlation of each CO with PO.
Semester I Communication Skills in English (Course Code: 4300002)
POs
Competency
& Course Outcomes
PO 1
Basic &
Discipline
specific
knowledge
PO 2
Problem
Analysis
PO 3
Design/
develop-
ment of
solutions
PO 4
Engineer-
ing Tools,
Experimen-
tation &
Testing
PO 5
Engineering
practices for
society,
sustain-
ability &
environment
PO 6
Project
Manage-
ment
PO 7
Life-long
learning
Competency Use reading, writing, speaking, listening skills to communicate effectively
in English
Course Outcomes
Students will be able to:
CO a). Use strategies to
minimise barriers of
effective
communication
- - - - - 2 2
CO b) Construct
grammatically
correct sentences.
2 - - - - 2 2
CO c) Develop reading and
listening skills in
terms of fluency and
comprehensibility
1 - - - - - 1
CO d) Compose different
types of written
communication.
2 - - - - 2 2
CO e) Communicate orally
in a given situation
with a purpose.
2 - - - - 2 2

-- 11 of 80 --

Communication Skills in English Course Code: 4300002
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 12 of 12
16. COURSE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
GTU Resource Persons
S.
No.
Name and
Designation Institute Contact No. Email
1 Dr. Peena Thanky R C Technical Institute
Ahmedabad 9409411256 drpeena@gmail.com
2 Dr. Rakhi Jain Government Polytechnic
Himmatnagar
9429237311 rakhi.shah73@yahoo.in
3 Dr. Almas Juneja Government Polytechnic
Ahmedabad
8140507181 almasjuneja@yahoo.co.in
4 Dr. Yatharth Vaidya L E College (Diploma)
Morbi
8980291650 yatharthvaidya@gmail.com
NITTTR Resource Persons
S.
No.
Name and
Designation Department Contact No. Email
1 Dr. Anjana Tiwari,
Assistant Professor
Deptt. of Technical &
Vocational Education
and Research
9131032813 atiwari@nitttrbpl.ac.in
anjana.khr@gmail.com
2 Dr. K.K. Jain,
Professor
Deptt. of Mechanical
Engineering Education
9425017472 kkjain@nitttrbpl.ac.in
3 Dr. Ajit Dixit,
Associate Professor
Deptt. of Technical &
Vocational Education
and Research
9685742594 adixit@nitttrbpl.ac.in

-- 12 of 80 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
DIPLOMA PROGRAMME
ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
COMMUNICATION SKILLS IN ENGLISH
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
DIPLOMA PROGRAMME
IN
ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
WORKBOOK
OF
COMMUNICATION SKILLS IN ENGLISH
1
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
COMMUNICATION SKILLS IN ENGLISH

-- 13 of 80 --

2
IMPORTANT NOTE:
This workbook is prepared for purely academic purpose only. The authors
have used various open web sources and books for content creation. The aim
is to help students by providing them learning material and ample exercises
for practice. This book is designed for smooth functioning of the course. The
content of this text must not be used for any kind commercial purpose.
Authors:
Dr. Peena Thanky Member: Board of Studies GTU. Lecturer in English
R C Technical Institute, Sola Ahmedabad.
Dr. Rakhi Jain 	Member: Board of Studies GTU. Lecturer in English
Government Polytechnic Himmatnagar
Dr. Yatharth
Vaidya
Member: Board of Studies GTU. Lecturer in English
L E College (Diploma) Morbi
-

-- 14 of 80 --

3
INDEX
S.N. 	UNIT 	PAGE NO.
SECTION 1 THEORY OF COMMUNICATION
Communication- Definition & Types
Barriers to Communication
05
SECTION 2 GRAMMAR
1 	Parts of Speech 	12
2 	Tenses 	20
3 	Modal Auxiliaries 	26
4 	Subject Verb Agreement 	30
5 	Basic Sentence Patterns of English 	34
SECTION 3 PROSE AND POETRY
1 	The Leopard 	37
2 	After Twenty Years 	42
3 	Stopping By woods on a Snowy Evening 	46
4 	Where the Mind is Without Fear 	47
SECTION 4 WRITING WORK
1 	Email Writing 	50
2 	Letter Writing 	61

-- 15 of 80 --

4
SECTION 1
THEORY OF COMMUNICATION

-- 16 of 80 --

5
What are communication skills?
Definition:
Communication skills are the abilities you use when giving and receiving different kinds of information.
Some examples include communicating new ideas, feelings or even an update on your project.
Communication skills involve listening, speaking, observing and empathising. It is also helpful to understand
the differences in how to communicate through face-to-face interactions, phone conversations and digital
communications like email and social media.
A deep understanding of the process of communication and communication skills is essential. It is vital to the
success of any individual in any business. Here we shall see some of the many types of communication.
Communication styles change from person to person. During the process of communication, a person may
invoke several channels or modes or methods to convey a message. But, the process of communication doesn’t
only depend on the source producing or relaying information.
It also equally depends on the communication method and the manner in which the receiver understands the
message. Let us first understand Basic Model Of Communication
Basic Communication Model :
The sender-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model of communication is an expansion of the Shannon-
Weaver model of communication. David Berlo created this model.
According to the Shannon-Weaver model, communication includes the following concepts: sender, encoder,
channel, decoder, receiver and feedback. Furthermore, there is also concept of "noise", which affects the
communication process going through the channel and makes the message more difficult to understand by the
receiver. Each of those concepts are defined as follows:
Sender: the originator of message.
Encoder: the transmitter which converts the message into signals (the way message is changed into signals, for
example sound waves).
Channel: the signal carrier or medium
Decoder: the reception place of the signal which converts signals into message. Decoding is done by the
receiver when he gets the message.
Receiver: the recipient of the message from the sender. He usually gives feedback to the sender in order to
make sure that the message was properly received.
Noise the message, transferred through a channel, can be interrupted by external noise (for instance,
conversation may be interrupted by thunder or crowd noise).
Feedback: The receiver can get an inaccurate message. This is why feedback from the receiver is important in
case the message is not properly received. Furthermore, the noise can also affect the decoding of the message by
the receiver.

-- 17 of 80 --

Communication begins at a given point. The first step is the generation of information. The second step is to put
this information or data into a medium for
During this process, the initiator of the communication must pay extra attention to the nature of the information.
The communication skills will determine the effectiveness of their communication.
Types:
On the basis of the communication channels, types of communic
A. 	Verbal
B. 	Non-Verbal
C. 	Visual
Verbal
This involves the use of language and words for the purpose of passing on the intended message. In general
terms, Verbal Communication means communication in the form of spoken words only. But, in the context of
types of communication, verbal communication can be in the spoken or the written form. Thus, the verbal form
may be oral or written as discussed below.
 	Written Communication: 	This kind of communication involves
the written form. For example, e-mails, texts, letters, reports, SMS, posts on social media platforms,
documents, handbooks, posters, flyers, etc.
 	Oral Communication: 	This is the communication
indirect as a communication channel. This verbal communication could be made on a channel that passes
information 	in 	only 	one 	form 	i.e. 	sound.
You could converse either face to face, or over the phone, or via voice notes or chat rooms, etc. It all
comes under the oral communication. This form of communication is an effective form.
Non-Verbal 	Communication
In this type of communication, messages are relayed without the transmission of words. The messages here are
wordless messages. This form of communication mainly assists ver
gestures, body language, symbols, and expressions.
Communication begins at a given point. The first step is the generation of information. The second step is to put
this information or data into a medium for 	transmission towards the intended audience.
s process, the initiator of the communication must pay extra attention to the nature of the information.
The communication skills will determine the effectiveness of their communication.
On the basis of the communication channels, types of communications are:
This involves the use of language and words for the purpose of passing on the intended message. In general
terms, Verbal Communication means communication in the form of spoken words only. But, in the context of
types of communication, verbal communication can be in the spoken or the written form. Thus, the verbal form
may be oral or written as discussed below.
This kind of communication involves 	any kind of exchange of information in
mails, texts, letters, reports, SMS, posts on social media platforms,
documents, handbooks, posters, flyers, etc.
This is the communication 	which employs the spoken word, either direct or
ication channel. This verbal communication could be made on a channel that passes
information 	in 	only 	one 	form 	i.e. 	sound.
You could converse either face to face, or over the phone, or via voice notes or chat rooms, etc. It all
cation. This form of communication is an effective form.
In this type of communication, messages are relayed without the transmission of words. The messages here are
wordless messages. This form of communication mainly assists verbal communication. It supplements it with
gestures, body language, symbols, and expressions.
6
Communication begins at a given point. The first step is the generation of information. The second step is to put
s process, the initiator of the communication must pay extra attention to the nature of the information.
This involves the use of language and words for the purpose of passing on the intended message. In general
terms, Verbal Communication means communication in the form of spoken words only. But, in the context of
types of communication, verbal communication can be in the spoken or the written form. Thus, the verbal form
any kind of exchange of information in
mails, texts, letters, reports, SMS, posts on social media platforms,
which employs the spoken word, either direct or
ication channel. This verbal communication could be made on a channel that passes
information 	in 	only 	one 	form 	i.e. 	sound.
You could converse either face to face, or over the phone, or via voice notes or chat rooms, etc. It all
cation. This form of communication is an effective form.
In this type of communication, messages are relayed without the transmission of words. The messages here are
bal communication. It supplements it with

-- 18 of 80 --

7
Through these, one may communicate one’s mood, or opinion or even show a reaction to the messages that are
relaying. One’s non-verbal actions often set the tone for the dialogue. You can control and guide the
communication if you control and guide the non-verbal communication. Some of the modes of non-verbal
communication are:
Physical Non-verbal Communication
This is the sum total of the physically observable. For instance, hand gestures, body language, facial
expressions, the tone of one’s voice, posture, stance, touch, gaze, and others. Several researchers have revealed
that physical nonverbal communication constitutes about 55% of our daily communications.
These are subtle signals that are picked up as part of our biological wiring. For example, if you rest your head
on your palms, it will mean that you are very disappointed or angry. Similarly, other subtle hints will convey
your reaction to the presenter or your audience’s reaction to you.
Paralanguage
This is the art of reading between the lines. The main kind of such communication is done with the tone of
one’s voice. This kind of communication amounts to almost 38% of all the communication that we do every
day. Along with the tone of voice, the style of speaking, voice quality, stress, emotions, or intonation serves the
purpose of communication. And, these aspects are not verbal.
Visual:
Visual communication is the transmission of information and ideas using symbols and imagery. It is one of
three main types of communication, along with verbal communication (speaking) and non-verbal
communication (tone, body language, etc.). Visual communication is believed to be the type that people rely
on most, and it includes signs, graphic designs, films, typography, and countless other examples. Visual
communication can be represented in the form of a graph, a map, a chart, a Vann diagram, a pie chart, a
model, a table, or even multimedia like gifs, videos, and images.
Barrier To Communication:
There are many reasons why interpersonal communications may fail. In many communications, the message
(what is said) may not be received exactly the way the sender intended. It is, therefore, important that the
communicator seeks feedback to check that their message is clearly understood.
The skills of Active Listening, Clarification and Reflection may help but the skilled communicator also needs to
be aware of the barriers to effective communication and how to avoid or overcome them.
There are many barriers to communication and these may occur at any stage in the communication
process. Barriers may lead to your message becoming distorted and you therefore risk wasting both time and/or
money by causing confusion and misunderstanding.
Effective communication involves overcoming these barriers and conveying a clear and concise
message. Common Barriers to Effective Communication:
 The use of jargon. Over-complicated, unfamiliar and/or technical terms.
 Emotional barriers and taboos. Some people may find it difficult to express their emotions and some
topics may be completely 'off-limits' or taboo. Taboo or difficult topics may include, but are not limited

-- 19 of 80 --

8
to, politics, religion, disabilities (mental and physical), racism and any opinion that may be seen as
unpopular.
 Lack of attention, interest, distractions, or irrelevance to the receiver. Differences in perception and
viewpoint.
 Physical disabilities such as hearing problems or speech difficulties.
 Physical barriers to non-verbal communication. Not being able to see the non-verbal cues, gestures,
posture and general body language can make communication less effective. Phone calls, text messages
and other communication methods that rely on technology are often less effective than face-to-face
communication.
 Language differences and the difficulty in understanding unfamiliar accents.
 Expectations and prejudices which may lead to false assumptions or stereotyping. People often hear
what they expect to hear rather than what is actually said and jump to incorrect conclusions.
 Cultural differences. The norms of social interaction vary greatly in different cultures, as do the way in
which emotions are expressed. For example, the concept of personal space varies between cultures and
between different social settings.
 A skilled communicator must be aware of these barriers and try to reduce their impact by continually
checking understanding and by offering appropriate feedback.
Note: MCQs of 07 Marks to be asked from this Unit in GTU Exam so practice MCQS.
Practice Questions:
1) What is communication?
a. Communication is the means by which we stay in touch with other people and know what is happening in
the world around us
b. Communication is the expression of ourselves in the form of verbal discussion
c. Communication is the varying ways in which we express ourselves
d. Communication is the various mediums we use for interaction
e. Communication is talking, listening, and interacting
2) True of False: All communication is verbal
a. True
b. False
3) What is non-verbal communication?
a. Non-verbal communication is another term for using body language
b. Non-verbal communication is about exchanging information without speaking words
c. Non-verbal communication is another term for written communication
d. Non-verbal communication is for people who cannot speak or hear

-- 20 of 80 --

9
4)Which of the following is NOT a form of non-verbal communication?
a. Touch
b. Facial expressions
c. Physical proximity
d. Skype
e. Sign language
5) Which of the following is an example of body language?
a. Facial expression
b. Eye contact
c. Posture
d. Gestures
e. All of the above
6) What is paralanguage?
a. Language for the disabled
b. How something is said, rather than what is said
c. What is said, rather than how it is said
d. When how something is said matches what is being said
e. When how something is said does not match what is being said
7) Factors that influence communication, may become what to effective communication?
a. Barriers
b. Obstacles
c. Enhances
d. Improvements
e. Challenges
8) How will you know if communication was successful?
a. The person smiles and gives open body language
b. The person answers

-- 21 of 80 --

10
c. It has the desired outcome
d. The person is agreeable
e. The person tells you
9) What does effective communication require?
a. Purpose or reason
b. Strategy or way of communicating
c. Acknowledgement
d. Feedback
e. All of the above
10) What is efficient communication?
a. Talking quickly and using minimal words to get the point across
b. Spending the minimum amount of time and effort to get the communication message across successfully
c. Ensuring that the message is understood and being thorough enough to get the point across
d. Being able to convey a message with just body language and gestures
e. Being able to use jargon and abbreviations while still being understood

-- 22 of 80 --

11
SECTION 2
GRAMMAR

-- 23 of 80 --

12
Unit 1
PARTS OF SPEECH
The part of speech explains how a word is used in a sentence. The part of speech indicates how the word
functions in meaning as well as grammatically within the sentence. An individual word can function as more
than one part of speech when used in different circumstances. Understanding parts of speech is essential for
determining the correct definition of a word when using the dictionary.
There are eight main parts of speech (also known as word classes): nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs,
adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions and interjection
NOUN - (Naming word)
A noun is the name of a person, place, thing or idea.
Examples of nouns: Daniel, London, table, dog, teacher, pen, city, happiness, hope
Example sentences: Steve lives in Sydney. Mary uses pen and paper to write letters
Practice Exercise:
Apply suitable nouns.
1. …..is late today.
2. ….is very expensive these days.
3. He has a blue ….
4. They are very good friends. Their ….is example for many of us.
5. The …..addressed the gathering.
PRONOUN - (Replaces a Noun)
A pronoun is used in place of a noun or noun phrase to avoid repetition.
Examples of pronouns: I, you, we, they, he, she, it, me, us, them, him, her, this, those
Example sentences: Mary is tired. She wants to sleep. I want her to dance with me.
Practice Exercise:
Apply suitable pronouns.
1 .I know Mr. James. ….is a very good doctor.
2. Please look after my family members. ….have arrived here today only.
3. Dr. Ranjana was my professor. ….received many awards.
4. Have you seen ….book?
5. The peacock is a beautiful bird. ….feathers are colourful.

-- 24 of 80 --

13
ADJECTIVE - (Describing word)
An adjective describes, modifies or gives more information about a noun or pronoun.
Examples: big, happy, green, young, fun, crazy, three
Example sentences: The little girl had a pink hat.
Practice Exercise:
Apply suitable adjectives.
1. I saw a …..truck on the road.
2. There are ….buildings in mega cities.
3. The garden has ……flowers.
4. My friend is wearing a ….shirt.
5. ….students get good marks.
VERB - (Action Word)
A verb shows an action or state of being. A verb shows what someone or something is doing.
Examples: go, speak, run, eat, play, live, walk, have, like, are, is
Example sentences: I like Woodward English. I study their charts and play their games.
Practice Exercise:
Apply suitable verbs.
1. Samarth …to college daily.
2. Children …in the garden.
3. We ….newspapers.
4. The manager ….the meeting.
5. I ….this temple everyday.
ADVERB - (Describes a verb)
An adverb describes/modifies a verb, an adjective or another adverb. It tells how, where, when, how often
or to what extent. Many adverbs end in -LY
Examples: slowly, quietly, very, always, never, too, well, tomorrow, here
Example sentences: I am usually busy. Yesterday, I ate my lunch quickly.
Practice Exercise:
Apply suitable adverbs.
1. The boy ran …..
2. They sang the song …..

-- 25 of 80 --

14
3. Rahul can play cricket …..
4. The teacher is teaching this topic …
5. We should listen to this news …..
PREPOSITION - (Shows relationship)
A preposition shows the relationship of a noun or pronoun to another word. They can indicate time, place,
or relationship.
Examples: at, on, in, from, with, near, between, about, under
Example sentences: I left my keys on the table for you.
In, On, At, into , for, Since, between, among, to, towards
In:
Use 1: When talking about time, we use ‘in’ when referring to an unspecific time of the day, a month, a
season or a year.
 I always brush my teeth in the morning.
 My birthday is in June.
 It’s always cold in winter.
 My brother was born in 1999.
Use 2: When talking about places, ‘in’ is used to indicate a location or place. Here are a few examples:
 “Mumbai is in India.
 I am in my room.
ON
Use 1: The word ‘on’, when talking about time, is for specific dates and days.
 He was born on September 24th.
 I go to the gym on Mondays and Wednesdays.
Use 2: When talking about places, ‘on’ is used when we are speaking about a surface. Something is on the
surface of something else.
For example:
 The papers are on the coffee table.
 “I left the keys on the counter.”
AT
Use 1: When talking about time, ‘at’ is used for a specific time.
 I will see you at 8:00 pm.
 My interview is at 3:00 pm.

-- 26 of 80 --

15
Use 2: When talking about places, ‘at’ is used to indicate a specific place.
 We are meeting at the cafe.
 The football game is at the stadium.
INTO:
Used for showing movement: entering a place, building, or vehicle
 Hundreds of athletes marched into the stadium for the opening ceremony.
 She got into her car and drove away.
FOR:
It describes duration. It means “From the start of the period to the end of the period. so it is used for
suggesting period of time.
 He has been living in Ahmedabad for several months .
 Usha has worked here for 10 years.
SINCE:
It defines a point in time in the past. It means “From a point in the past until now.”
 He has been watching TV since 7 pm.
 Mohan had been writing a book since 2010
BETWEEN:
Between is usually used with two separate and distinct things.
For example:
 The treasure is between the palm tree and the hut.
 Our holiday house is between the mountains and the sea.
AMONG :
Among is used with separate and distinct things more than two. It is used to portray the idea of
being in a group or in the midst of a group. For example:
 I want to live among like-minded people.
 Share these sweets among yourselves.

TO :
Use 1. It is used to indicate a destination or direction:
 .Does he want to come to the park with us?
Use 2. It is used to indicate time
 Her train arrives at quarter to five.
TOWARDS:
It means in the direction of somebody/something

-- 27 of 80 --

16
 They were heading towards the garden.
Sample Exercise:
1. He lives --- Hyderabad.
2. He started --- six --- the morning.
3. . The child has been missing --- yesterday.
4. The mail train is due --- 3 P.M.
5. He travelled thirty kilometres --- two hours.
6. the flower pot was kept….the shelf …the room.
7.. --- last month I have seen him but once.
8. The four friends shared the food ….themselves.
9. I saw him running ….the market.
10. The boy jumped .. the river to save the child.
CONJUNCTION - (Joining word)
A conjunction joins two words, ideas, phrases or clauses together in a sentence and shows how they are
connected.
Examples: and, or, but, because, so, yet, unless, since, if.
Example sentences: I was hot and exhausted but I still finished the marathon.
Connectors - ,
If, Unless, Otherwise, Because, Therefore, Who, Which, Where, When, Why.
If & Unless
It shows Condition. if + present simple+ modal verb with future meaning
 If the weather improves, we’ll go for a walk.
 Rama will go if Hari goes.
Unless means something similar to ‘if … not’
 We’ll go to the coast tomorrow unless it rains.
 Grievances cannot be redressed unless they are known.
Otherwise:
It is used to show what the result will be if the thing or condition, mentioned before, does not occur.
 Take your umbrella, otherwise you will get wet.
Because:
It connects the result of something with its reason.
 She spoke quietly because she didn’t want her friend to hear.
Therefore:
It indicates the cause or result of a situation.
 I studied for long hours, therefore I got very high marks from the final exams.
Who
It is used to introduce a new part of a sentence about a person that was mentioned before.
 Mr. Mathur, who is a professor is known to me.
Which
It is used to introduce a new part of a sentence about a thing that was mentioned before.
 The book which you bought yesterday is very useful.

-- 28 of 80 --

17
Where
It is used to introduce a new part of a sentence about a place that was mentioned before.
 The place where players are staying is a five star resort.
When:
It is used to introduce a new part of a sentence about time that was mentioned before
 The time when you called me, I was in a meeting.
Why:
It is used to introduce a new part of a sentence about reason that was mentioned before
 The officer told us the reason why he was in urgency to leave.
Practice exercise:
Join the sentence groups using suitable connectors.
1. He passed the exam. He had a good teacher.
2. I do not eat meat. I do not eat eggs.
3. She is poor. She is honest.
4. I can not tell you the reason. I will not attend the function.
5. I felt ill. I went on working.
6. Rohit scored a century. India won the match.
7. The car was badly damaged in the accident. It needs repair.
8. We feel bored. We go to the movies to relieve our boredom.
9. Mohit must give in. He must also apologize. Jatin will not forgive him otherwise.
10. The children were playing hide-and-seek.. The rain came down suddenly.
INTERJECTION - (Expressive word)
An interjection is a word or phrase that expresses a strong feeling or emotion. It is a short exclamation.
Examples: Ouch! Wow! Great! Help! Oh! Hey! Hi!
 Wow! I passed my English test.
 Great!
 Ouch! That hurts

-- 29 of 80 --

18
Summary chart
Parts Of Speech

-- 30 of 80 --

19
Practice Exercise:
To solve this exercise, you have to identify the noun, pronoun, verb, adverb, adjective, preposition,
conjunction, interjection in the given sentences.
Tom went to market to buy books ( __________ ).
He went to the market but ( __________ ) did not buy new books.
I liked ( __________ ) him ( __________ ) better than he likes me.
A smart girl was dancing quickly ( __________ ).
She ( __________ ) eats apples in the morning daily.
When he was sitting ( __________ ) on the grass, a snake bit him.
You ( __________ ) caught him by his arm.
A rich ( __________ ) lady bought a beautiful ( __________ ) necklace.
Hurrah! ( __________ ) I have passed the examination.
The cat is sitting under ( __________ ) the chair.
Alas! ( __________ ) I could not receive you.
The body of the cage is made of iron. ( __________ )
It is not your ( __________ ) pen; it is hers.
There is still some milk in ( __________ ) the jug.
Jimmy is performing ( __________ ) his duties diligently.
The drawing made by you is almost ( __________ ) perfect.
I shall not go unless ( __________ ) you allow.
The road is to ( __________ ) go by.
The flowers smell sweet. ( __________ )
He frequently ( __________ ) goes to the beach.

-- 31 of 80 --

20
UNIT 2. TENSES
In grammar, tense is a category that expresses time reference with reference to the moment of speaking.
Tenses are usually manifested by the use of specific forms of verbs, particularly in their conjugation
patterns. It is very essential to have knowledge of tenses for correct use of a language to establish effective
communication.
There are three types of Tenses- Present, Past and Future.
Example:
o We watch movies every weekend. - Present Tense
o He wrote an application for that job yesterday. - Past Tense
o You will complete the project by next month. – Future Tense
Present Tense – The verb in present tense refers to the present time.
Past Tense- The verb in past tense refers to the past time.
Future Tense- The verb in future tense refers to the future time.
The tense of a verb shows not only time of action but also the state of action referred to. Each of these
Tenses has four sub tenses-
1) Simple,
2) Continuous,
3) Perfect and
4) Perfect Continuous Tense.
Simple or Indefinite Tense:
Here the verb specifies the simple action, without anything being said about the completeness or
incompleteness of the action.
Sub Tense Person 	Singular 	Plural
Present 	First person 	I speak 	We speak
Second person 	You speak 	You speak
Third person 	He / She / It speaks 	They speak
Past 	First person 	I Spoke 	We spoke
Second person 	You spoke 	You spoke
Third person 	He / She / It spoke 	They spoke
Future 	First person 	I shall speak 	We shall speak
Second person 	You will speak 	You will speak
Third person 	He / She / It will speak 	They will speak
Continuous/Progressive Tense:
Here the verb indicates incomplete or continuous action.
Sub Tense 	Person 	Singular 	Plural
Present 	First person 	I am speaking 	We are speaking
Second person You are speaking 	You are speaking
Third person 	He / She / It is speaking 	They are speaking
Past 	First person 	I was speaking 	We were speaking

-- 32 of 80 --

21
Second person You were speaking 	You were speaking
Third person 	He / She / It was speaking 	They were speaking
Perfect Tense:
Here the verb shows that the action is completed or perfect.
Sub Tense Person 	Singular 	Plural
Present 	First person 	I have spoken 	We have spoken
Second person 	You have spoken 	You have spoken
Third person 	He/she/it has spoken 	They have spoken
Past 	First person 	I had spoken 	We had spoken
Second person 	You had spoken 	You had spoken
Third person 	He/ she/ it had spoken 	They had spoken
Perfect Continuous Tense:
Here the verb shows that the action started in past and still it is in progress.
Sub Tense Person 	Singular 	Plural
Present 	First person 	I have been watching 	We have been
watching
Second person 	You have been watching 	You have been
watching
Third person 	He/she/it has been watching 	They have been
watching
USES OF TENSES :-
Present Tense [Simple Present Tense]
It is used:
i. 	To express a habitual action or an action happens regularly.
Examples:
o The manager gets up at five and starts work at seven
o Umesh practices the piano every day.
ii. 	For universal or general truth.
Examples:
o The earth turns 360º every day.
o Antarctica is covered with ice.
iii. 	In narrative such as sports events or demonstrations (substitute for the simple past). Examples:
o Virat catches the ball and he throws it to the wicket.
o First I put some butter in the pan and turn on the cooker.
iv. 	To express a future event that is part of a fixed timetable.
Examples:
o The train leaves at 03.00 pm sharp.
o The flight is at 07.00 tomorrow morning.

-- 33 of 80 --

22
v. 	To state the facts and things in general that is always true.
Examples:
o India is a rich source of herbs.
o Gold isn’t liquid at room temperature.
vi. 	In exclamatory sentences beginning with ‘here’ and ‘there’.
Examples:
o There goes your trainer!
o Here comes the train you are waiting for!
vii. To introduce quotations.
Example:
o Swami Vivekananda says, “Arise, awake and do not stop until the goal is reached”.
viii. Instead of the simple Future Tense in clauses of time and condition
Examples:
o I shall wait till you finish your lunch.
o If you heat water to 100 degrees, it boils.
Present Tense [Present Continuous Tense]
It is used:
i. 	To indicate an action that is happening at the moment of speaking.
Examples:
o I am just leaving office. I’ll be home in an hour.
o Please be quiet. The children are sleeping.
ii. 	To indicate an action which may not happening at the time of speaking.
Examples:
o Aren't you teaching at the university now?
o At two in the afternoon, we are eating lunch.
iii. 	For definite future arrangements.
Examples:
o We are going to the beach at the weekend.
o I am not going to the party tonight.
iv. 	For habits that are not regular, but that happen very often. (an adverb like 'always', 'continuously' or
'constantly' are used)
Example:
o You are continuously losing your keys.
o She is constantly missing the train.
o Adhiraj is always smiling.
v. 	Verbs which refers to state rather than actions or progress, are not normally used in the continuous
form in the present tense:
a) 	Perceptions: feel, smell, hear, taste, see
b) 	Emotions: want, wish, envy, fear, dislike, hate, hope, like, love regret, hope, refuse.
c) 	Thinking: think, suppose, believe, agree, consider, trust, remember, forget, know, understand,
imagine
d) 	Appearing: appear, look, seem.
Present Tense [Present Perfect Tense]
It is used:

-- 34 of 80 --

23
i. 	To indicate an action completed in the recent or immediate past (with just). Examples:
o I have just finished my work.
o He has just taken the medicine.
ii. 	To indicate a past action happened at an unspecified time.
Examples:
o I have been to France three times.
o Madhuri has never travelled by train.
o Manisha has studied two foreign languages.
iii. 	To show that something started in the past and has continued up until now. Examples:
o Rashmi has been in England for six months.
o Priya has loved chocolate since she was a little girl.
The adverb and adverbial phrases with unfinished time expressions can be used in Present Perfect such as:
ever, never, once, many times, several times, before, so far, this month, this year, this week, today, already,
yet, etc but not with specific past /finished time expressions such as: yesterday, one year ago, last week,
when I was a child, when I lived in Japan, at that moment, that day, one day, etc.
Perfect Continuous Tense (Present Perfect Continuous Tense)
It is used
i. To express actions which started in the past and continue to the present. We often use this with 'for' and
'since'
o I've been living in London for two years.
o She's been working here since 2004.
o We've been waiting for the bus for hours.
ii. To express actions which have recently stopped and have a result, which we can often see, hear, or feel,
in the present. We don't use a time word here. The action is over but the effect can be seen.
o I'm so tired, I've been studying.
o I've been running, so I'm really hot.
o It's been raining so the pavement is wet.
Past Tense [Simple Past Tense]
It is used:
i. 	To express the idea that an action started and finished at a specific time in the past. Examples:
o I didn't see a play yesterday.
o Did you have dinner last night?
ii. 	Sometime the specific time may not be mentioned. It can be implied by context. Example:
o I didn’t sleep well (last night).
iii. 	To describe a past habit
Examples:
o They never went to school, they always skipped class.
o Did you play a musical instrument when you were a kid?
Past Tense [Past Continuous Tense]-
It is used:

-- 35 of 80 --

24
i. 	For an action going on at some time in the past.
Examples:
o Kavya was enjoying the games at funfair
o Stuti was preparing for IIT entrance exam.
ii. 	The past continuous and simple past are used together when a new action happened in the middle of
longer action. Simple past used for later action.
Examples:
o While I was writing the email, the computer suddenly went off.
o What were you doing when I called you?
iii. 	It is also with ‘Always’, ‘continuously’ ‘continually’ or ‘constantly’ for persistent habit in the past.
Examples:
o She was always coming to class late
o I didn't like them because they were continuously complaining.
Past Tense [Past Perfect Tense]-
It is used:
i. 	To indicate a completed action before a certain point of time in the past.
Examples:
o When we arrived, the film had started.
o I had never seen such a beautiful beach before I went to Miami.
ii. 	To express the idea that something occurred before another action in the past. Examples:
o When I reached home, my mother had left for the office.
o I had written the letter before he arrived.
Future Tense [Simple Future Tense]-
It is used:
i. 	To talk about facts in the future time which we cannot control.
Examples:
o My uncle will turn forty this Sunday
o It will rain this week.
ii. 	To indicate an action that we think, expect, hope or believe will happen in the future. Examples:
o I think Brazil will win the World Cup.
o I’m sure you will enjoy the games.
o Probably, it will rain today.
iii. 	To indicate an action that we decide to do at the time of speaking
Examples:
o The task is not completed; I will complete it by evening.
o It is raining. I will take an umbrella.
Sample Exercises:
Rewrite the following sentences using correct form of verbs given in bracket.
1) 	When you arrive tonight, we……….. (go) out for dinner.

-- 36 of 80 --

25
2) 	Whenever we meet, we ……….. (plan) a trip.
3) 	The sun ……….. (shine) brightly.
4) 	Vijay ……….. (wait) for me when I arrived.
5) 	I promise I ……….. (not/tell) him about the surprise party.
6) 	Shikhar Dhawan ……….. (score) a century in the last match.
7) 	I ……….. (get) hungry. Let's go and have something to eat.
8) 	. …….. (have) you ever ……….. (visit) the U.S. before your trip in 2006?
9) 	Who ……….. (invent) the bicycle?
10) Yesterday evening the phone ……….. (ring) three times while we ……….. (have) dinner.
11) When I met you last time, you ……….. (think) of moving to a new flat.
12) She only understood the movie because she ……….. (read) the book.
13) Can you ……….. (help) me move this heavy table?
14) Hello Nitya, I ……….. (not/see) you for ages. How are you?
15) We can go out now. It ……….. (not/rain) any more.
16) He ……….. (go) to that place every year.
17) There I……….. (notice) how important it……….. (be) to speak English nowadays.
18) And I……….. (already begin /) to read the novel.
19) If I ……….. (pass) my exams successfully, I……….. (start) an apprenticeship in September.
20) While I ……….. (do) the language course, I ……….. (meet) lots of young people from all over the
world.

-- 37 of 80 --

26
UNIT 3. MODAL AUXILIARIES
An Auxiliary verb is a verb which helps or supports the main verb to form its tense, voice or mood. They are
basically helping verbs and there are two types of Auxiliaries:
Primary & Modal.
[1] Primary Auxiliaries
a) Be (am, is, are ,was, were)
o I am a doctor.
o He was given a prize by the principal.
o They are doing their work.
o They were working here last year.
b) have (has, had) [Possession]
o We have a flat in Ahmedabad.
o Dr Tanna has a car.
o She had no money.
c) do (does, did) (Questions & Negative)
o What do you want from me? I don’t have enough money.
o Does he go school on time?
o Did he complete his work?
[2] Modal Auxiliaries are used to express various moods and attitudes like permission, ability, duty, advice,
suggestion, possibility …
SHALL
o He shall leave for Ahmedabad tomorrow. (Future )
o You shall be punished if you are late again. (Threat)
o You shall go out of the class. (Command)
o She shall have a prize. (Promise)
o Shall we have a cup of coffee?(Suggestion/ Proposal)
o Shall I carry your luggage? ( to offer service)
SHOULD
o We should obey our elders. (Duty)
o We should keep promises.(Obligation)
o She should be in laboratory now. (Probability)
WILL
o He will come tomorrow. (Future)

-- 38 of 80 --

27
o Will you lend me a pen, please? (Polite Request)
o I will speak to your customer care. (Threat)
o You will not go without my permission. (Command)
o I will teach you English (Promise)
o I will meet my target. (Determination)
o I will come to see you tomorrow. (Willingness)
WOULD
o Would you lend me your scooter, please? (Politeness)
o I wish you would get good marks.(Desire)
o I would like to have some coffee (likes/dislikes)
o I would rather stay at home than watching movie. (preference)
CAN
o She can speak English fluently. (Ability)
o We can walk 5 kms a day. (Capacity)
o Ramesh can come tomorrow. (Permission)
o She can be at home. (Possibility)
COULD
o I could run fast, when I was young. (Ability in Past)
o Could you help me in my assignment? (Request / Politeness)
MAY
o The guest may come. (Possibility)
o May I Come in Sir ? (Permission)
o It may rain today. (Uncertainty)
o May God bless you! (Wishes/Blessings)
MIGHT
o He might not come (Rare Possibility)
o Mayank has not come to school today. He might have missed the bus. (Possibility of Past)
MUST

-- 39 of 80 --

28
o I must get the first prize. (Determination)
o He must have attended the meeting. (Certainty)
o You must pass mid semester exam. (Compulsion.)
o You must do your homework regularly. (Necessity)
o You must not speak loudly in the hospital. (Prohibition.)
# Note:- have to/has to also suggests compulsion and necessity. Had to is used to show feeling of compulsion in
past.
o I have to submit an assignment tomorrow.
o I had to submit the assignment yesterday though I was not much satisfied with my work.
NEED
o You need to go to a doctor.(Necessity)
o You need not study as the examination is over (absence of Necessity)
OUGHT TO
o We ought to love our neighbours. (Duty / Obligation / Desire)
Sample Exercise:
[1] Fill in the blanks with appropriate modal auxiliary:
1. On Saturdays, we …….go to school in informal dress.
2. Varun …… go for a vacation this summer.
3. When I was young, I …… swim across Ganga.
4. You ………not raise your voice.
5. I ……. to work hard to improve my performance.
[2] Fill in the blanks with appropriate modal auxiliary:
1) .…….we play football? (Permission)
2) The astrologer ….. leave the village as he lied to people. (compulsion)
3) The Indian Eleven ……. be disheartened. (Absence of Necessity)
4) …………we go to their help? (suggestion)
5) She ……come tomorrow.(Possibility)
6) ……have your book? (Permission)
7) Tomorrow ….. be a holiday. (Future)
8) Do not put off till tomorrow what you …. do today. (Ability)
9) He ….not tell a lie before me. (Desirability)
10) You …..come whenever you like. (Permission)
11) ……..god help you. (Blessing)
12) We …….honour our parents . (Moral obligation)
13) ……. You please let me have your book? (Polite request)
14) You …. Carry out government orders. (Compulsion)

-- 40 of 80 --

29
15) He tried hard but … not lift it. (Past ability)
16) People …….. to vacate the village, as the flood has crossed the danger mark. (Necessity)
17) I ……borrow from this library very soon. (Ability)
18) We ……help the needy. (Desirability)
19) …….I carry your luggage? (Permission)
20) You …..not go until you finish this assignment. (Prohibition)
21) She ….. climb the hill when she was in college. (past ability)
22) ……..you teach my brother phonetics, please? (polite request)
23) I …….. read French. (ability)
24) They …..not enter the kitchen with shoes. (prohibition)
25) …….we have a cup of tea?( suggestion)
26) You ….. write assignment in this book. (permission)
27) We …… to take our umbrella as it is raining. (necessity)
28) We ….. take bath in the morning daily. (desirability)
29) Your wrist watch is almost new. You ……. Buy another one. (absence of necessity)
30) You ….. smoke at a petrol pump. It is highly inflammable. (negative obligation)
31) ……. You sweep my drawing room? (polite request)
32) No one …….. carry explosives in the train. (negative prohibition)

-- 41 of 80 --

30
UNIT 4. SUBJECT VERB AGREEMENT
Subject – Verb Agreement means the harmony between the subject of the sentence and the verb. The verb
always follows the subject of the sentence.
1. A finite verb must agree its subject in person and number.
Examples:
o I am reading a book.
o He is playing.
o The child is playing.
o The children are watching cartoons.
2. The Error of Proximity:
In cases where subject and verb are separated by a long phrase or a clause, the verb agrees with the
real subject and not the noun or pronoun placed next to it.
Examples:
o The apples in the basket are fresh.
o The strong bond of affection between the two cousins was obvious.
o The joys one experiences in one’s childhood are beyond description.
3. The Introductory ‘There’:
In a sentence beginning with there, the verb agrees with the real subject that follows there.
Examples:
o There is no proof of his involvement in this case.
o There are major flaws in your argument.
4. Two or More Nouns or Pronouns joined by ‘And’
(a) Subject consists of two or more nouns or pronouns joined by and- PLURAL Verb.
Examples:
o He and I were given the responsibility of the stage.
o Hard work and sincere efforts are the key to success.
(b) The nouns refer to the same person or thing –SINGULAR Verb
Examples:
o The director and producer of the movie was present there.
o Rice and curry is his favorite dish.
(c) The nouns convey the same meaning, placed together only for emphasis-Singular verb
Examples:
o The honour and the glory of my country is uppermost in my mind.
o The power and influence Gandhiji exerted over the Indian masses was really great.
5. Subject consists of two nouns or pronouns joined with as well as, together with, along with, in
addition to: verb agrees with the first subject
Examples:

-- 42 of 80 --

31
o Mr. Das as well as his friends has escaped unhurt.
o You as well as I are responsible for our losses.
o The captain with othe team members was given a hearty welcome.
6.Two subjects joined with not only, but also: Verb agrees with the latter subject
Example:
o Not only the principal but also the teachers have played an important role.
7. Two subjects joined with…or, neither…has .nor verb agreed with the latter subject.
Examples:
o Either you or Gaurav is responsible for the mistake.
o Neither Gaurav nor you are responsible for the mistake.
8. One subject singular and the other plural
The pattern is: Either /Neither+ Singular sub +or/nor + Plural sub. Plural verb
Examples:
o Either he or his parents are going to attend the marriage.
o Neither the moon nor the stars are shining today.
9. Either, Neither, Each, Everyone, One of the -Singular Verb
Examples:
o She does not care what either of her parents says.
o Neither of these two students has done well.
o Each of the students has to submit the assignment.
o Everyone in the family has been questioned.
o One of the books is going to win the Booker Prize.
10. None refers to amount or quality - Singular Verb
Example:
o None of the work was done.
 None followed by plural noun or pronoun: Verb usually plural but can be singular
Examples:
o None of the stories are interesting.
o None of his stories has appealed the audience.
11. Much, More, Little, Less - Singular Verb
Examples:
o Much of my anxiety is over.
o More than half of the time is over.
o Little has been achieved so far.
o Less of my time is now wasted on attending to phone calls.
12. A lot of, a great deal of, plenty of, most of, some of, refer to amount or quantity

-- 43 of 80 --

32
Singular Verb Examples:
o A lot of time was wasted on preliminary enquiries.
o Plenty of help was available.
o Lots of food was distributed to the poor.
 A lot of, a great deal of, plenty of, most of, some of refer to number.
Plural Verb Examples:
o Lots of people are taking part in the marathon.
o Plenty of shops accept payments by a credit card.
Sample Exercise:
[1] Fill in the blanks:-
1. The sound of bells ……..(was, were) heard all over the neighborhood.
2. Sincere effort not more advice …. (is, are) the need of the hour.
3. Some of the work (remain, remains) to be done.
4. Either the captain or the bowler …. (is, are) at fault.
5. The teacher along with the students (have, has) gone on picnic.
6. Neither of the candidates (was, were) suitable.
7. The teacher as well as the students (was, were) present on the ground.
8. She, not you (have, has) given the right answer.
[2] Pick the right verb:-
1. His use of clauses and connectors (is/are) appalling.
2. One of the students in my class (own/owns) a motorcycle.
3. There (was/were) several; people in the adjoining room.
4. The deputy along with thirty miners (were/was) killed.
5. The pump including the motor and the hose (cost/costs) Rs. 10,000/-.
6. Either the sand or the cement (is/are) bad.
7. The chief engineer accompanied by two executive engineers (is/are) coming today.
8. Each of the boxes (weigh/weighs) 10 kgs.
9. None if the gas (has/have) been consumed.
10. Either Ram or his brother (work/works) as a manager here.
11. None of them (attends/attend) to their work these days.
12. Some of the work (remain/remains) unfinished.
13. Some of the pipes (run/runs) for several miles.
14. All the oil (has/have) been stolen.
15. All the laborers (is/are) tribals.
16. Apple pie and custard (is/are) my favourite dish.
17. Some people (dislikes, dislike) travelling by sea, as it (make, makes) them sea-sick.
18. The Thirty-Nine steps (was, were) written by John Buchan.
19. The secretary and the member (has, have) come to visit the institute today.
20. The trouble with these guys (is,are) their rustic approach.

-- 44 of 80 --

33
21. A lot of good we take (is/are) wasted.
22. A large amount of money he invested ( was/were) lost.
23. Some more milk (is/are) needed.
24. None of these dishes (is/are) to my taste.
25. Only a few students (is/are) likely to fail.
26. A little dust (is/are) visible.
27. A lot of money (has/have) been spent on buildings.
28. None of the children (is/are) intelligent.
29. The president and the secretary (were/was) arrested.

-- 45 of 80 --

34
UNIT 5 Basic Sentence Patterns of English
Sentence: A sentence is a textual unit consisting of one or more words that are grammatically linked.
Here we will study basic four patterns of English. For better understanding of the same, We need to
understand the following terms.
Subject: A subject is a part of a sentence that contains the person or thing performing the action (or verb) in
a sentence. Traditionally the subject is the word or phrase which controls the verb in the clause.
 The peon rings the bell.
Verb: Verbs are words that express action or state of being. You have studied about them in parts of speech
and tenses. They are action words in the sentence.
 He runs fast.
Object: An object is a noun, a noun phrase, or a pronoun that is affected by the action of a verb.
 Ram is reading a newspaper.
Adverbial: Adverbials are words that we use to give more information about a verb. They can be one word
(angrily, here) or phrases (at home, in a few hours) and often say how, where, when or how often something
happens or is done, though they can also have other uses..
 He speaks fluently.
 Lata ate breakfast yesterday morning.
Complement: Complement is the term used for a word or words that are needed to complete the meaning
of an expression.
 Algebra is difficult.
The following are basic four patterns to make a meaningful sentence.
1. S + V : Subject + Verb
 He/ laughed.
 Dogs/ bark.
 We /enjoyed.
2. S+V+O: Subject + Verb+ Object
 We / received / the parcel.
 Many students / witnessed / the play.
 The police / arrested / the thief
3. S+V+A: Subject + Verb+ Adverbial
 The train / arrived / late
 It / rained / last night
 He / reads / slowly
4. S+V+C: Subject + Verb+ Complement

-- 46 of 80 --

35
 They / are / players.
 I / am / an Indian.
 Her father / is / a doctor
Practice exercise
1. Identify the sentence pattern of given sentences.
1. They / worked / hard
2. It / was / a very pleasant talk
3. The winner was rewarded.
4. She / sings / a song
5. They / came / suddenly.
6. The class / became / noisy
7. People/ cried.
8. Her father / is / a doctor
9. I /refuse.
10. You/ are/ intelligent.
2. Form ten sentences of each sentence pattern.

-- 47 of 80 --

36
SECTION 3
PROSE AND POETRY

-- 48 of 80 --

37
Unit 1
The Leopard
Ruskin Bond
I first saw the leopard when I was crossing the small stream at the bottom of the hill.
The ravine was so deep that for most of the day it remained in shadow. This encouraged many birds and
animals to emerge from cover during daylight hours. Few people ever passed that way: only milkmen
and charcoal-burners from the surrounding villages.
As a result, the ravine had become a little haven of wildlife, one of the few natural 	sanctuaries left near
Mussoorie, a hill- station in northern India.
Below my cottage was a forest of oak and maple and Himalayan rhododendron. A narrow path twisted
its way down through the trees, over an open ridge where red sorrel grew wild, and then steeply down
through a tangle of wild raspberries, creeping vines and slender bamboo.
At the bottom of the hill the path led on to a grassy verge, surrounded by wild dog roses. (It is
surprising how closely the flora of the lower Himalayas, between 5,000 to 8,000 feet, resembles
that of the English countryside.)
The stream ran close by the verge, tumbling over smooth pebbles, over rocks 	worn yellow with
age, on its way to the plains and to the little Song River and finally to the sacred Ganges.
When I first discovered the stream it was early April and the wild roses were flowering—small white
blossoms lying in clusters.
I walked down to the stream almost every day, after two or three hours of writing.
I had lived in cities too long, and had returned to the hills to renew myself, both 	physically and
mentally. Once you have lived with mountains for any length of time, you belong to them, and must
return again and again.
Nearly every morning, and sometimes during the day, I heard the cry of the 	barking deer. And in the
evening, walking through the forest, I disturbed parties of pheasant. The birds went gliding down the
ravine on open, motionless wings. I saw pine martens and a handsome red fox, and I recognized the
footprints of a bear.
As I had not come to take anything from the forest, the birds and animals soon 	grew accustomed to my
presence; or possibly they recognized my footsteps. Aftersome time, my approach did not disturb them.
The langurs in the oak and rhododendron trees, who would at first go leaping 	through the branches at
my approach, now watched me with some curiosity as theymunched the tender green shoots of the oak.
The young ones scuffled and wrestled like boys, while their parents groomed 	each other’s coats,
stretching themselves out on the sunlit hillside. But one evening, as I passed, I heard them chattering
in the trees, and I knew I was not the cause of their excitement.
As I crossed the stream and began climbing the hill, the grunting and chattering increased, as though the
langurs were trying to warn me of some hidden danger. A shower of pebbles came rattling down the
steep hillside, and I looked up to see a sinewy, orange-gold leopard poised on a rock about twenty feet
above me.
It was not looking towards me, but had its head thrust attentively forward, in the direction of the
ravine. Yet it must have sensed my presence, because it slowly turned its head and looked down at
me.
It seemed a little puzzled at my presence there; and when, to give myself courage, I clapped my hands

-- 49 of 80 --

38
sharply, the leopard sprang away into the thickets, making absolutely no sound as it melted into the
shadows.
I had disturbed the animal in its quest for food. But a little after I heard the quickening cry of a barking
deer as it fled through the forest. The hunt was still on.
The leopard, like other members of the cat family, is nearing extinction in India, and I was surprised
to find one so close to Mussoorie. Probably the deforestation that had been taking place in the
surrounding hills had driven the deer into this green valley; and the leopard, naturally, had followed.
It was some weeks before I saw the leopard again, although I was often made aware of its presence. A
dry, rasping cough sometimes gave it away. At times I feltalmost certain that I was being followed.
Once, when I was late getting home, and the brief twilight gave way to a dark, 	moonless night, I was
startled by a family of porcupines running about in a clearing. I looked around nervously, and saw two
bright eyes staring at me from a thicket. I stood still, my heart banging away against my ribs. Then the
eyes danced away, and Irealized that they were only fireflies.
In May and June, when the hills were brown and dry, it was always cool and green near the stream,
where ferns and maidenhair and long grasses continued to thrive.
Downstream I found a small pool where I could bathe, and a cave with water dripping from the roof,
the water spangled gold and silver in the shafts of sunlightthat pushed through the slits in the cave roof.
‘He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still 	waters.’ Perhaps David
had discovered a similar paradise when he wrote those words; perhaps I, too, would write good
words. The hill-station’s summer visitors had not discovered this haven of wild and green things. I was
beginning to feel thatthe place belonged to me, that dominion was mine.
The stream had at least one other regular visitor, a spotted forktail, and though it did not fly away at my
approach it became restless if I stayed too long, and then it would move from boulder to boulder
uttering a long complaining cry.
I spent an afternoon trying to discover the bird’s nest, which I was certain 	contained young ones,
because I had seen the forktail carrying grubs in her bill. The problem was that when the bird flew
upstream I had difficulty in following her rapidly enough as the rocks were sharp and slippery.
Eventually I decorated myself with bracken fronds and, after slowly making my way upstream, hid
myself in the hollow stump of a tree at a spot where the forktail 	often disappeared. I had no intention
of robbing the bird: I was simply curious to seeits home.
By crouching down, I was able to command a view of a small stretch of the 	stream and the sides of
the ravine; but I had done little to deceive the forktail, who continued to object strongly to my
presence so near her home.
I summoned up my reserves of patience and sat perfectly still for about ten 	minutes. The forktail
quietened down. Out of sight, out of mind. But where had she gone? Probably into the walls of the
ravine where I felt sure, she was guarding hernest.
I decided to take her by surprise, and stood up suddenly, in time to see not the 	forktail on her
doorstep, but the leopard bounding away with a grunt of surprise! Two urgent springs, and it had
crossed the stream and plunged into the forest.
I was as astonished as the leopard, and forgot all about the forktail and her nest. Had the leopard
been following me again? I decided against this possibility. Only man-eaters follow humans, and, as
far as I knew, there had never been a man-eaterin the vicinity of Mussoorie.
During the monsoon the stream became a rushing torrent, bushes and small trees 	were swept away,
and the friendly murmur of the water became a threatening boom. I did not visit the place too often, as
there were leeches in the long grass.
One day I found the remains of a barking deer which had only been partly eaten. I wondered why the

-- 50 of 80 --

39
leopard had not hidden the rest of his meal, and decided that it must have been disturbed while eating.
Then, climbing the hill, I met a party of hunters resting beneath the oaks. They asked me if I had seen a
leopard. I said I had not. They said they knew there was a leopard in the forest.
Leopard skins, they told me, were selling in Delhi at over 1,000 rupees each. Of course there was a ban
on the export of skins, but they gave me to understand that 	there were ways and means. . . . I thanked
them for their information and walked on,feeling uneasy and disturbed.
The hunters had seen the carcass of the deer, and they had seen the leopard’s pug- 	marks, and they kept
coming to the forest. Almost every evening I heard their guns banging away; for they were ready to
fire at almost anything.
‘There’s a leopard about,’ they always told me. ‘You should carry a gun.’‘I don’t have one,’ I said.
There were fewer birds to be seen, and even the langurs had moved on. The red fox did not show
itself; and the pine martens, who had become quite bold, now 	dashed into hiding, at my approach. The
smell of one human is like the smell of anyother.
And then the rains were over and it was October; I could lie in the sun, on sweet- smelling grass, and
gaze up through a pattern of oak leaves into a blinding blue 	heaven. And I would praise God for leaves
and grass and the smell of things, the smell of mint and bruised clover, and the touch of things—the
touch of grass and airand sky, the touch of the sky’s blueness.
I thought no more of the men. My attitude towards them was similar to that of the denizens of the forest.
These were men, unpredictable, and to be avoided if possible.
On the other side of the ravine rose Pari Tibba, Hill of the Fairies: a bleak, scrub- covered hill where
no one lived.
It was said that in the previous century Englishmen had tried building their houses on the hill, but the
area had always attracted lightning, due to either the hill’s location or due to its mineral deposits; after
several houses had been struck by lightning, the settlers had moved on to the next hill, where the town
now stands.
To the hillmen it is Pari Tibba, haunted by the spirits of a pair of ill-fated loverswho perished there in a
storm; to others it is known as Burnt Hill, because of its scarred and stunted trees.
One day, after crossing the stream, I climbed Pari Tibba—a stiff undertaking, 	because there was no
path to the top and I had to scramble up a precipitous rock-face with the help of rocks and roots that
were apt to come loose in my groping hand.
But at the top was a plateau with a few pine trees, their upper branches catching the wind and
humming softly. There I found the ruins of what must have been the houses of the first settlers—just a
few piles of rubble, now overgrown with weeds,sorrel, dandelions and nettles.
As I walked through the roofless ruins, I was struck by the silence that surrounded me, the absence of
birds and animals, the sense of complete desolation.
The silence was so absolute that it seemed to be ringing in my ears. But there was something else of
which I was becoming increasingly aware: the strong feline odour of one of the cat family.
I paused and looked about. I was alone. There was no movement of dry leaf or loose stone. The ruins
were for the most part open to the sky. Their rotting rafters had collapsed, jamming together to form
a low passage like the entrance to a mine;and this dark cavern seemed to lead down into the ground.
The smell was stronger when I approached this spot, so I stopped again and 	waited there, wondering
if I had discovered the lair of the leopard, wondering if the animal was now at rest after a night’s
hunt.
Perhaps he was crouching there in the dark, watching me, recognizing me, 	knowing me as the man
who walked alone in the forest without a weapon.
I like to think that he was there, that he knew me, and that he acknowledged my visit in the

-- 51 of 80 --

40
friendliest way: by ignoring me altogether.
Perhaps I had made him confident—too confident, too careless, too trusting of thehuman in his midst.
I did not venture any further; I was not out of my mind. I did not seek physical contact, or even another
glimpse of that beautiful sinewy body, 	springing from rock to rock. It was his trust I wanted, and I
think he gave it to me.
But did the leopard, trusting one man, make the mistake of bestowing his trust on others? Did I, by
casting out all fear—my own fear, and the leopard’s protective fear —leave him defenseless?
Because next day, coming up the path from the stream, shouting and beating 	drums, were the hunters.
They had a long bamboo pole across their shoulders; and slung from the pole, feet up, head down,
was the lifeless body of the leopard, shot in the neck and in the head.
‘We told you there was a leopard!’ they shouted, in great good humour. ‘Isn’t he afine specimen?’
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘He was a beautiful leopard.’
I walked home through the silent forest. It was very silent, almost as though the birds and animals knew
that their trust had been violated.
I remembered the lines of a poem by D. H. Lawrence; and, as I climbed the steep and lonely path to
my home, the words beat out their rhythm in my mind: ‘There was room in the world for a mountain
lion and me.’
Glossary:
Ravine: Narrow Valley
Sanctuary: Shelter
Curiosity: Interest
Extinction: Loss
Pasture: Grazing Land
Precipitous: Steep
Denizens: A person, animal, or plant that lives or is found in a particular place
Glimpse: Sight
Ex: 1. Choose the correct option:
1. The author first saw the leopard when …
(a) he was climbing the hill (b) it was caught by hunters (c) he was crossing the
stream (d) he was going after forktail
2. When the author discovered the stream, it was month of …
(a) May (b) June (c) February 	(d) April
3. The … was a regular visitor of the stream.
(a) Forktail (b) Tiger (c) lion (d) sparrow
4 Leopared skins are sold in ….
(a) Delhi (b) Kolkatta (c) Lucknow (d) Mumbai
5 . ….. is called Hill of Fairies
(a) Pari Hill (b) Angel Tibba (c) God Hill (d) Pari Tibba

-- 52 of 80 --

41
Ex: 2. Answer the following questions:
1. Describe the valley where the leopard lived.
2. Why did the author return to mountains?
3. Why didn’t his approach disturb the birds and animals?
4. What happened when the leopard sensed the author’s presence?
5. What did the author do to find forktails’s home?
6. What was the hunters’ advice to the author?
7. What was the author’s attitude towards men?
Suggested Speaking Skills Topics (For 30 Marks of PA in LAB)
1. Beauty of Nature
2. Cruelty towards Animals
3. Environment Conservation

-- 53 of 80 --

42
UNIT 2 After Twenty Years
O'Henry
The policeman on the beat moved up the avenue impressively. The impressiveness was habitual and not for show,
for spectators were few. The time was barely 10 o'clock at night, but chilly gusts of wind with a taste of rain in them
had well nigh depeopled the streets.
Trying doors as he went, twirling his club with many intricate and artful movements, turning now and then to cast his
watchful eye adown the pacific thoroughfare, the officer, with his stalwart form and slight swagger, made a fine
picture of a guardian of the peace. The vicinity was one that kept early hours. Now and then you might see the lights
of a cigar store or of an all-night lunch counter; but the majority of the doors belonged to business places that had
long since been closed.
When about midway of a certain block the policeman suddenly slowed his walk. In the doorway of a darkened
hardware store a man leaned, with an unlighted cigar in his mouth. As the policeman walked up to him the man
spoke up quickly.
"It's all right, officer," he said, reassuringly. "I'm just waiting for a friend. It's an appointment made twenty years ago.
Sounds a little funny to you, doesn't it? Well, I'll explain if you'd like to make certain it's all straight. About that long
ago there used to be a restaurant where this store stands--'Big Joe' Brady's restaurant."
"Until five years ago," said the policeman. "It was torn down then."
The man in the doorway struck a match and lit his cigar. The light showed a pale, square-jawed face with keen eyes,
and a little white scar near his right eyebrow. His scarfpin was a large diamond, oddly set.
"Twenty years ago to-night," said the man, "I dined here at 'Big Joe' Brady's with Jimmy Wells, my best chum, and
the finest chap in the world. He and I were raised here in New York, just like two brothers, together. I was eighteen
and Jimmy was twenty. The next morning I was to start for the West to make my fortune. You couldn't have dragged
Jimmy out of New York; he thought it was the only place on earth. Well, we agreed that night that we would meet
here again exactly twenty years from that date and time, no matter what our conditions might be or from what
distance we might have to come. We figured that in twenty years each of us ought to have our destiny worked out
and our fortunes made, whatever they were going to be."
"It sounds pretty interesting," said the policeman. "Rather a long time between meets, though, it seems to me.
Haven't you heard from your friend since you left?"
"Well, yes, for a time we corresponded," said the other. "But after a year or two we lost track of each other. You see,
the West is a pretty big proposition, and I kept hustling around over it pretty lively. But I know Jimmy will meet me
here if he's alive, for he always was the truest, stanchest old chap in the world. He'll never forget. I came a thousand
miles to stand in this door to-night, and it's worth it if my old partner turns up."
The waiting man pulled out a handsome watch, the lids of it set with small diamonds.
"Three minutes to ten," he announced. "It was exactly ten o'clock when we parted here at the restaurant door."
"Did pretty well out West, didn't you?" asked the policeman.

-- 54 of 80 --

43
"You bet! I hope Jimmy has done half as well. He was a kind of plodder, though, good fellow as he was. I've had to
compete with some of the sharpest wits going to get my pile. A man gets in a groove in New York. It takes the West
to put a razor-edge on him."
The policeman twirled his club and took a step or two.
"I'll be on my way. Hope your friend comes around all right. Going to call time on him sharp?"
"I should say not!" said the other. "I'll give him half an hour at least. If Jimmy is alive on earth he'll be here by that
time. So long, officer."
"Good-night, sir," said the policeman, passing on along his beat, trying doors as he went.
There was now a fine, cold drizzle falling, and the wind had risen from its uncertain puffs into a steady blow. The few
foot passengers astir in that quarter hurried dismally and silently along with coat collars turned high and pocketed
hands. And in the door of the hardware store the man who had come a thousand miles to fill an appointment,
uncertain almost to absurdity, with the friend of his youth, smoked his cigar and waited.
About twenty minutes he waited, and then a tall man in a long overcoat, with collar turned up to his ears, hurried
across from the opposite side of the street. He went directly to the waiting man.
"Is that you, Bob?" he asked, doubtfully.
"Is that you, Jimmy Wells?" cried the man in the door.
"Bless my heart!" exclaimed the new arrival, grasping both the other's hands with his own. "It's Bob, sure as fate. I
was certain I'd find you here if you were still in existence. Well, well, well--twenty years is a long time. The old gone,
Bob; I wish it had lasted, so we could have had another dinner there. How has the West treated you, old man?"
"Bully; it has given me everything I asked it for. You've changed lots, Jimmy. I never thought you were so tall by
two or three inches."
"Oh, I grew a bit after I was twenty." "Doing
well in New York, Jimmy?"
"Moderately. I have a position in one of the city departments. Come on, Bob; we'll go around to a place I know of,
and have a good long talk about old times."
The two men started up the street, arm in arm. The man from the West, his egotism enlarged by success, was
beginning to outline the history of his career. The other, submerged in his overcoat, listened with interest.
At the corner stood a drug store, brilliant with electric lights. When they came into this glare each of them turned
simultaneously to gaze upon the other's face.
The man from the West stopped suddenly and released his arm.
"You're not Jimmy Wells," he snapped. "Twenty years is a long time, but not long enough to change a man's nose

-- 55 of 80 --

44
from a Roman to a pug."
"It sometimes changes a good man into a bad one," said the tall man. "You've been under arrest for ten minutes,
'Silky' Bob. Chicago thinks you may have dropped over our way and wires us she wants to have a chat with you.
Going quietly, are you? That's sensible. Now, before we go on to the station here's a note I was asked to hand you.
You may read it here at the window. It's from Patrolman Wells."
The man from the West unfolded the little piece of paper handed him. His hand was steady when he began to read,
but it trembled a little by the time he had finished. The note was rather short.
"Bob: I was at the appointed place on time. When you struck the match to light your cigar I saw it was the
face of the man wanted in Chicago. Somehow I couldn't do it myself, so I went around and got a plain
clothes man to do the job.”
JIMMY.
.”
Glossary:
on the beat: usual path of a policeman on duty
avenue : road with trees on both sides
habitual : usual
intricate : complicated
chilly: very cold
gust: sudden violent rush of wind
pacific: peaceful
thoroughfare: a street much used by traffic and open at both ends
swagger: walk in a proud manner
vicinity: surroundings, neighbourhood
reassuringly: comfortingly and without any fear
torn down: pulled down, demolished
oddly: strangely
chum: close friend
chap: fellow, man
dragged out: caused to last an unnecessarily long time in
bustling around: moving around quickly
turns up: comes up, arrives
plodder: person who works slowly but earnestly
groove: way of living that becomes a habit
twirled: turned round quickly
club: heavy stick with one thick end
drizzle: rain in many fine drops
astir: in a state of excitement
dismally: gloomy
lasted: existed for more time
egotism: practice of talking about oneself
chat: friendly talk

-- 56 of 80 --

45
Sample Exercises:
Ex: 1. Choose the correct option:
1. The location of the story is near ….
(b) Dehradun (b) Mussoorie 	(c) Shimla (d) Dharmashala
3. Where was the man standing?
(b) Near general store (b) near medical store (c) near bus stand 	(d) near
hardware store
4. When was the appointment made ?
(a) Before 20 years (b) before 15 years (c) after 20 years
(d) before 10 years
5. The man was waiting for his __________________.
(b) wife (b) friend (c) brother (d) customer
6. The man and his friend Jimmy belong to ___________ city.
(a) New York (b) London (c) Mumbai (d) Paris
7. What was the time of appointment?
(a) 12 o’clock (b) 11 o’clock (c) 10 o’clock (d) 9 o’clock
8. What did the tall man handed over to Bob?
(a) A book (b) a bag (c) a chocolate (d) a note
9. Who wrote the note?
(a) Bob (b) Jimmy 	(c) Vera (d) O’Henry
Ex: 2. Answer the following questions:
8. How did the policeman move up the avenue?
9. How was the weather that night?
10. What did the stranger say to the policeman?
11. What was there in place of the store at that spot twenty years ago?
12. Who was the stranger’s friend?
13. Where did they take the last dinner?
14. What kind of man was his friend Jimmy?
15. What did Bob tell the man in the overcoat?
16. Was he really his friend Jimmy Wells?
17. Why was Bob under arrest?
18. Whose note was handed over to Bob in the end?
Suggested Speaking Skills Topics (For 30 Marks of PA in LAB)
1. Friendship
2. What is more important- duty or relations?
3. The choice between Right and Wrong .

-- 57 of 80 --

46
UNIT 3 Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening
Robert Frost
Whose woods these are I think I know.
His house is in the village though;
He will not see me stopping here
To watch his woods fill up with snow.
My little horse must think it queer
To stop without a farmhouse near
Between the woods and frozen lake
The darkest evening of the year.
He gives his harness bells a shake
To ask if there is some mistake.
The only other sound’s the sweep
Of easy wind and downy flake.
The woods are lovely, dark and deep,
But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep,
And miles to go before I sleep
Glossary:
Woods : an area of land covered with thick growth of trees
Queer: beyond or deviating from the usual or expected
Farmhouse: a house attached to a farm
Frozen: turned into ice
Harness: an arrangement of leather straps fitted to a draft animal
Flake : a crystal of snow
Promise: a verbal commitment to do something in the future
Sleep : euphemisms for death
Sample Exercise:
Q.1 Where was the speaker going? What stopped him on the way?
Q.2 What according to the speaker will surprise the horse?
Q.3 What does the speaker wish to convey through the phrase “fill up with the snow”?
Q.4 What does the poet says about the owner of the woods?
Q.5 What are the sights and sounds that the poet experiences in the woods?
Q.6 What promises do you think the poet has to keep?
Q.7 What message do the last paragraph convey?
Q. 8 What is the role played by the horse in this poem?
Q. 9 Write a short note on :
(1) Description of nature
(2) Central idea of the poem

-- 58 of 80 --

47
UNIT 4 Where the Mind is Without Fear
Rabindranath Tagore,
“Where the mind is without fear
and the head is held high,
where knowledge is free.
Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow domestic walls.
Where words come out from the depth of truth,
where tireless striving stretches its arms toward perfection.
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost it's way
into the dreary desert sand of dead habit.
Where the mind is led forward by thee
into ever widening thought and action.
In to that heaven of freedom, my father,
LET MY COUNTRY AWAKE!”
―
Glossary:
Fragments- pieces
Head is held high- self respect
Domestic- pertaining to family.
Striving – try hard, motivated.
Tireless - without getting tired
Stream: river
Dreary: dull
Reason: intellect
Dead habit: old customs
Desert – dry area of land
Awake- to get up from sleep
Sample Exercise:
Q.1 What is meant by “mind is without fear and head is held high”. Tick the correct answer.
(i) to be fearless and self respecting
(ii) to be proud of one’s high position .

-- 59 of 80 --

48
(iii) to stand straight and be carefree.
Q. 2. What does the poet mean by “where knowledge is free”?
Q.3. The ‘domestic walls’ are usually associated with safety, comfort and love.What is the meaning of
‘narrow domestic walls’? Choose the correct answer.
(i) small houses which make us feel cramped
(ii) ideas which are petty and narrow-minded.
iii) a house divided into rooms by walls.
Q.4. What according to the poet do people tirelessly strive towards?
Q.5. How does the poet describe the old habit?
Q.6 How does the poet describe ‘heaven of freedom’?
Q.7. Who does the poet address as ‘thee’ and my father?
Q.8 What kind of freedom does the poet desire for his country?
Q.9 Write a short note on the central idea of the poem.

-- 60 of 80 --

49
SECTION 4
WRITING

-- 61 of 80 --

The email writing format is the 	same for each of the categories, t
depending upon the type of email. One can use friendly and casual language in
used in formal emails should be professional, clear, and formal.
The email writing format is
Email Format
Let us look at the important 	steps to 	follow
1. Subject line
Grab attention with the subject line. The first part of an email which your recipient sees is the subject of the
email. If you 	do not put it well, you risk having your email not opened until later or at all. Here are some
things to keep in mind:
 	Make the subject line 	specific,
report you asked for', write, 	'Internsh
 	The subject line should be 	short. Ideally, your subject line should stand around six words.
 	Keep the most 	important and 	informative
 	Use 	markers 	like 	Fwd, Reply, 	Urgent
reader about the nature of your email.
Some of the examples of good subject lines in formal emails can be:
 	Marketing Data for July 2018
Email Writing
same for each of the categories, though the choice of words and language differ
depending upon the type of email. One can use friendly and casual language in 	informal
used in formal emails should be professional, clear, and formal.
follow 	when writing a formal email.
Grab attention with the subject line. The first part of an email which your recipient sees is the subject of the
do not put it well, you risk having your email not opened until later or at all. Here are some
simple, and to the point. For example, instead of
'Internship Report, {date/week/month}'.
. Ideally, your subject line should stand around six words.
informative 	words in the beginning 	of the subject line.
Urgent, or 	Notice 	to 	further narrow down the subject. It informs your
reader about the nature of your email.
Some of the examples of good subject lines in formal emails can be:
50
hough the choice of words and language differ
emails. The language
Grab attention with the subject line. The first part of an email which your recipient sees is the subject of the
do not put it well, you risk having your email not opened until later or at all. Here are some
. For example, instead of 	'The internship
. Ideally, your subject line should stand around six words.
of the subject line.
further narrow down the subject. It informs your

-- 62 of 80 --

51
 Marketing Budget, October 2018
 List of New Freelancers
 Job Application for the Post of XYZ
 Leave Application
 Query Regarding the Missing Information in the Document
 Contract Agreement - XYZ Assignment
2. Salutation
Each email is directed towards someone. Start your formal email with addressing the recipient in a manner
fitting the relationship you have with them.
For people you are unfamiliar with or do not know the names of, use 'To Whom It May Concern' or 'Dear
sir/madam'.
For senior officials, stick to their designation or follow it with their name, for example, 'To the Manager',
'Dear Dr. Ghosh', or 'Dear Ms. Kapoor'.
Among colleagues, it may be appropriate to simply precede the name with a 'Hi'.
Do not skip the salutation and always be respectful. Never use nicknames or just surnames or first names in
a formal email.
3. Body of the email
The body text is the main part of your email. It is important to follow a certain pattern when writing the
body of your email.
 The opening paragraph should set the tone and reason for your email. Introduce yourself if you
are a stranger to the person you are writing to, and jot down why you are writing to them.
 For example, you can begin with 'My name is Abc, and this email is with reference to Xyz.' or 'This is
with reference to the marketing budget as discussed in the meeting.'
 Elaborate on your concern, question, or response as comprehensively as possible. Write in a way
that is easy to understand, but at the same time, do not lose your point in providing unnecessary
information. Say only what is required.
 The closing of the email should also support the nature of your email. If you are asking a question,
close with something like 'Hope to have an answer from you soon', or 'Looking forward to hearing
from you soon', and if you are addressing a question, end with 'Hope I have sufficiently answered
your query/doubts.'
 Signature
 These are the last words of your email, capable of forming a lasting impression on your reader.
 Sign off with a simple word or phrase, which conveys respect. Safe choices are 'Best regards',
'Warmly', 'Sincerely', 'Kind regards', or simply 'Thanks'.
 If you are writing to someone for the first time or someone who is not an immediate colleague or
senior, use your full name.

-- 63 of 80 --

52
 Furnish your name with contact information. Your phone number and/or work address are
enough.
 If you are writing on behalf of or as an employee of an institution, make sure to mention it along
with adequate contact details
 To make your signature even more effective, you may also choose or design an attractive (but not
flashy) template.
Formal Email Samples
Formal emails are sent in a whole variety of situations. While they use the same rules, they may have to be
modified according to their purpose.
Now that you are familiar with the format of a formal email, let us have a look at few email samples.
Email sample 1: A request
Subject: Extension on Report Deadline
Dear Mr./Ms. {Recipient’s sir name},
I am writing this to request you for an extension on the XYZ project report which is due
on {date}. My mother has taken ill unexpectedly, and I must leave for home tonight. I’m
afraid it will take me a week before I can return to the office and complete the report.
Kindly grant me an extension till {date} for the same. I promise to deliver the project
report by then.
Sincerely,
{Your name}
{Phone number}

-- 64 of 80 --

53
Sample Emails
1.Inquiry
Question: Draft an email to make an inquiry for raincoats and umbrellas from a wholesaler in Mumbai .
To: rambrellasuppliers@gmail.com
From: tirupatiagency@gmail.com
Subject: Inquiry for different varieties of raincoats and umbrellas.
Dear Sir,
We would like to buy raincoats and umbrellas (product) for the next monsoon. You are a leading
manufacturer of raincoats and umbrellas. We have also visited your website and we are interested in starting
business with you.
We would like to see your company catalogue which has details of all the products that you manufacture.
We would like to have all the details of different models and sizes of your products we intend to sell them
during the coming rainy season.
Let us know the prices of your products and the rate of discount you allow Please inform us the time you
will take to deliver the goods.
We hope to receive a prompt reply to this inquiry.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________(Name)
2. Reply to inquiry
Question: You have received an inquiry for raincoats and umbrellas Draft a suitable reply.
To: tirupatiagency@gmail.com

-- 65 of 80 --

54
From: rambrellasuppliers@gmail.com
Subject: reply to inquiry for different varieties of raincoats and umbrellas.
Dear Sir,
We have received your mail regarding the inquiry for different raincoats and umbrellas. We appreciate your
interest in our products.
We have attached our company catalogue of all our products that we manufacture and price list with this
mail.
We shall allow you 30% discount on the prices of these products. We can supply your goods within 10 days
of receiving the order. You have to settle the account within 15 days of receiving the goods.
Please note that we will give you 3% extra rebate if your order exceeds Rs. 500000.
We are keen on executing your order quickly and carefully.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________ (Name)
3. Placing an order
Question: Place an order of Air conditioners for your newly constructed branch office.
To: kabirworld21@gmail.com
From: gujaratagro@gmail.com
Subject: order for air conditioners for new office
Dear Sir,

-- 66 of 80 --

55
We have received your mail reply to our inquiry about the air conditioners .We are thankful to you for your
prompt reply.
We have studied the specification of the air conditioners and have found that it is according to our need. The
terms and conditions of business stated by you are suitable to us. So, we request you to supply us 15 air
conditioners as shown below:
Sr.No Type 	capacity Quantity Unit
Price
Total Price
1 	Voltas AC with
inverter
1.5 ton 3 	35000 105000
2 	Voltas AC with
inverter
2.0 ton 5 	52000 260000
3 	Voltas AC without
inverter
1..5ton 2 	33000 66000
4 	Voltas AC without
inverter
2.0 ton 5 	50000 100000
Total 531000
Please note that the air conditioners ought to be installed before 15th May 2021 since our new office is to
start functioning from 18th May 2021..
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________(Name)
4. Complaint: Delay in Delivery of goods
Question: You have placed an order for table and ceiling fans for coming summer season. But the order has not been
executed even after one month. Draft the complaint to the supplier about delay in delivery of goods.
To: newindia@gmail.com
From: Gujaratelectronics@gmail.com

-- 67 of 80 --

56
Subject: complaint for delay in delivery of fans.
Dear Sir,
We refer to our order dated 2nd April 2021 for Usha Table and Ceiling Fans. We have specially instructed
you to supply them before 18th April 2021but we are sorry we have not yet received the goods.
We had ordered the goods for the coming summer season. The delay in delivery of our order has caused
great loss to our business.
We, therefore , request you to supply them within 7 days of receiving the mail. If you fail to do so, we shall
be compelled to cancel our order.
We look forward to your prompt and positive response..
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________(Name)
5. Adjustment to above Complaint.
New India Electrical Suppliers have received a complaint from Gujarat Electronics, Ahemdabad about delay in
delivery of goods. Draft a suitable reply.
To: Gujaratelectronics@gmail.com
From: newindia@gmail.com
Subject: reason for delay in delivery of fans
Dear Sir,
We have received your mail regarding delay in delivery of your order for table and ceiling fans. We are
sorry for the inconvenience caused to you due to this delay.
The workers and staff in our office were on strike so the administrative work was badly paralyzed . Due to
this we could neither execute your order nor intimate you about the delay in delivery.

-- 68 of 80 --

57
However, the strike has been called off now. We hope we shall be able to dispatch the goods with four or
five days. We trust you will understand our position and cooperate.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________ (Name)
Complaint: shortage in goods
Question: You have placed an order for 500 compass boxes. But the consignment had only 475 boxes. Draft a
complaint to the supplier.
To: omegainstruments@gmail.com
From: swastikstationers@gmail.com
Subject: complaint for shortage in number of boxes..
Dear Sir,
We are thankful to you for executing our order no. 24/A dated 20th April 2021 for500 Camel Compass
boxes. However, we are sorry to point out that the execution of the order has not been as careful as it ought
to be.
Our shop assistant has opened the container of compass boxes. He has reported that there are 475 compass
boxes in it instead of 500.
Please make the necessary adjustment. We are sure that you will execute our orders more carefully in future.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________(Name)
Adjustment to above Complaint.

-- 69 of 80 --

58
Omega Instruments have received a complaint from Swastik Stationers that he has received 475 instead of 500 ordered
by him. Draft a suitable reply.
To: swastikstationers@gmail.com
From: omegainstruments@gmail.com
Subject: adjustment for remaining 25 boxes
Dear Sir,
We have received your mail on 25th May 2021. We regret to note that you have received 475 Compass
Boxes instead of 500 against your order no.24/A of 20th April 2021 .
We have dispatched the remaining 25 compass boxes by Maruti Couriers. You will receive them tomorrow
evening.
We request you not to judge our services by this isolated incident. We shall try to render consistently
efficient services in future.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________ (Name)
Complaint: damaged goods
Question: You have placed an order for 250 Flower Vases. But you found that the consignment had 23 flower vases in
damaged condition. Draft a complaint to the supplier.
To : duraguardglasses@gmail.com
From: suhasininovelties@gmail.com
Subject: complaint for damaged flower vases.
Dear Sir,
We have received 250 flower vases against our order no. 76/C dated 20th June 2021. However, when our
shop assistant opened the box, he found 23 vases in damaged condition.

-- 70 of 80 --

59
This damage is due to the fact that you have not packed the goods in thermocoal lined boxes according to
our instructions.
Please send us 23 new flower vases. Alternatively permit us to adjust their price in the settlement of the
invoices.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________(Name)
Adjustment to above Complaint.
Duraguard Glasses Limited have received a complaint from Suhasini Novelties that he has received 23 flower vases
in damaged condition. Draft a suitable reply.
To: suhasininovelties@gmail.com
From: duraguardglasses@gmail.com
Subject: adjustment for damaged flower vases
Dear Sir,
We have received your mail on 25th July 2021. We are sorry to note that you have received 23 flower vases
in damaged condition out of total 250 in the consignment against your order no.76/C of 20th June 2021 .
We accept our liability in this matter . We have enclosed a credit note for Rs. 2300 along with this mail
against 23 damaged flower vases.
We regret the trouble caused to you in this transaction. We assure you to execute your orders more carefully
in future.
Thank You
Yours sincerely,
____________ (Name)

-- 71 of 80 --

60
Exercise:
1. You have placed an order for 15 HP scanners to National Systems Limited, but
received only 12 scanners. Draft an email to the supplier complaining about it.
2. Draft an email asking for the illustrated catalogue and quotation of certain electronic
goods required by your firm.
3. Draft a complaint to Swagat Furnitures asking for compensation as you found some of
the pieces of furniture delivered in the damaged condition.
4. The Book Store in your college requires 15 copies of Oxford Advanced Dictionary.
Place an order for it.
5. The proprietor of sports goods manufacturing company has received a complaint from
one of their customers regarding non-execution of his order in stipulated time. Draft a
suitable reply.
6. You are interested in purchasing a variety of watches and clocks from Quartz Palace.
Draft an email for inquiry.
7. You have an email inquiring about prices of plastic toys manufactured by you. Draft a
reply.
8. Place an order for 50 Godrej Filing Cabinets for your newly constructed office.
9. You have received a consignment of sugar bags and found shortage in weight .Draft
an email to complaint about it.
10. One of your customers has complained the curtains supplied by you are of inferior
quality and not in accordance with the samples shown to him. Draft a reply expressing
your regrets and showing willingness to replace the goods.

-- 72 of 80 --

61
Business Letters
A business letter is a letter from one company to another, or between such organizations and their
customers, clients, or other external parties. The overall style of letter depends on the relationship between
the parties concerned. Business letters can have many types of content, for example to request direct
information or action from another party, to order supplies from a supplier, to point out a mistake by the
letter's recipient, to reply directly to a request, to apologize for a wrong, or to convey goodwill. A business
letter is useful because it produces a permanent written record, and may be taken more seriously by the
recipient than other forms of communication.
Qualities of a Good Letter:
The 7 Cs of business communication which make it are:
1. Clarity
2. Correctness
3. Conciseness
4. Courtesy
5. Concreteness
6. Consideration
7. Completeness
#1: Clarity
Practicing clarity in your communication ensures that the message is received accurately. You should know
what you wish to say and how to say it. Use language that can be easily understood, and resist the temptation
to include unnecessary information.
Example:
Instead of saying, “We have considered the consequences of the existing policy on the hiring strategies we
employ with our human resources department and updated them accordingly,” say, “We have updated our
hiring policy.”
#2: Correctness
You must communicate with correctness – correct grammar, language, data, etc. In written communication,
you should proofread before sending.
Example:
“You may enter the building during opening hours but must show relevant I.D.”
Immediately, the recipient of this information has two questions:
 “What are the opening hours, and what ID is considered relevant?
Correctness in this communication is conveyed by saying, “You may enter the building during the opening
hours of 9am to 5pm daily, but must show your employee identity card.”
#3: Conciseness
Never use more words than is necessary. Brevity is more easily understood, though you must avoid
discourtesy. Concise messages save you and the recipient time, too. To be concise, follow these rules:
 Eliminate unnecessary words

-- 73 of 80 --

62
 Use action verbs
 Remove repetition
Example:
“As a matter of fact, during the month of June, all employees must ensure that they wear appropriate
clothing to ensure they stay cool while the air-conditioning is being repaired.”
Becomes:
“Indeed, during June, employees must wear appropriate clothing to stay cool while the air-conditioning is
repaired.”
#4: Courtesy
Employ courtesy when communicating. This shows you respect the recipient and helps to build goodwill.
You must ensure that you are sincere, thoughtful, and do not use discriminatory language.
Example:
“I don’t appreciate how your team ignores requests for collaboration from my team. The work we do is
equally as important as your work. Could you make certain that your team collaborates more readily from
now on?”
Such a message is unlikely to encourage a negative response. Instead, a more effective approach would be:
“I understand that your team is extremely busy and receives many requests to collaborate on project work.
However, my team is working a highly urgent project with enormous mutual benefits. I would greatly
appreciate if you could ask your team to collaborate more effectively with mine to move this project forward
faster. If there is any help that we can provide to make this happen, please let me know.”
#5: Concreteness
Concrete communication is specific, clear, and meaningful. It avoids vagueness, uses available facts and
figures to add authenticity, and builds around an active voice.
Example:
An example would be poor communication of underperformance during a one-to-one. You might say, “Your
sales numbers are on the low side. They need to be improved to at least the team’s average.”
Give your employee concrete direction with evidence and an active voice:
“Your sales conversion rate is below 50%. You must improve this to the team average of 65% or higher.”
#6: Consideration
Be considerate with your messaging by putting yourself in the position of the recipient. Focus on
communicating to ‘you’, considering needs and issues experienced by the recipient.
Example:
Imagine that you are unable to pay a promised bonus. How do you communicate this?
“We are unable to pay bonuses now. The business is awaiting payment from a major client. Once this
payment is received, we can consider paying contractual bonuses as soon as is practicable.”
This could be better conveyed as follows:
“Unfortunately, we are not presently in the position to pay your bonus. However, as soon as our major client
has settled their account, we will pay any bonuses owed to you. We’re sorry about this delay, but are sure
you understand our need for positive cash flow and the long-term benefits this will deliver to you.”

-- 74 of 80 --

63
#7: Completeness
Your message should be complete, delivering all the facts needed for the recipient to make an informed
decision. Incomplete messages often receive poor responses.
To ensure your communication is complete, ask if it answers the what, when, why, who, where, and how.
Example:
“You haven’t completed the task that I set you,” is a message full of ambiguity. Instead, make sure you
include all relevant facts:
“The data analysis for client ABC that I asked for on March 5 should have been completed by today. Will
you have it finished this afternoon?”
Format:
A business letter must include:
1. Address
The address of the person receiving the correspondence includes a formal name, street address, city, state,
and pin code.
2. Date
The date is put for any business communication.
The date is a critical piece of information documenting when the correspondence was sent.
This is important for correspondence that may be kept for future reference.
3. Subject Line
This indicates the subject of the letter so the receiver gets the idea what is the letter about.
4. Salutation
The salutation is the formal way of addressing the person.
Common salutations are Dear or To Whom It May Concern.
5. Introduction
The first few sentences of a letter are introductory.
The introduction section introduces the subject of the letter.
It is a summary in a sentence or two that explains the goal of the letter.
For example, an introduction may be something like:
I am writing today to further explore a vendor relationship with XYZ Corporation.
6. Body of the Letter
The body of the letter is where the bulk of the information is shared.

-- 75 of 80 --

64
The body of the letter explains in detail all aspects of what is being communicated.
This would include detail of the information being shared.
For instance, the body may be something like this:
We understand that XYZ Corporation can provide tools for 10% less than other competitors. And, that the focus on
service after the sale is amongst the best in the industry.
7. Closing
The closing of the letter summarizes what the letter was about and any next steps or action items.
This section gives the reader a heads up that the communication is coming to a close.
For instance, the closing may be something like this:
Please call me at your earliest convenience to discuss a vendor relationship and to explore if we can come to a
mutually beneficial relationship. I look forward to speaking with you soon.
8. Signature
The signature section has a complimentary closing.
Examples are Sincerely, Warmest Regards, Respectfully Yours, Very Truly Yours, or Cordially Yours.
Be sure to gauge the audience when selecting a complimentary closing.
After the complimentary closing, space is left for the signature that goes above the typed name and title of
the person sending the letter.

-- 76 of 80 --

65

-- 77 of 80 --

66
Sample Letters
1. Order Letter
From
_________
__________
_________
Date: _____ (Date on Which Letter is Written)
To,
__________
__________
__________
__________
Subject: Order Letter
Dear Sir,
I am the purchase manager of XYZ Company and I am personally writing this letter to
order goods for our site work. As we have been purchasing goods from you company since
some time now, I am writing this letter to order material.
Along with this letter I am attaching the list of materials or goods that is needed. Please
make sure you send it across in a week as the requirement is a bit urgent this time.
I hope there is enough stock left with you to complete this order of ours. Thanking you for
your support and timely orders till date.
Thanking You,
Yours truly,
____________
Name and Signature

-- 78 of 80 --

67
2. Complain letter
From
__________ (your name)
__________
__________ (your address)
Date __________ (date of writing letter)
To
__________ (name of recipient)
__________ (designation)
__________ (name of organization)
__________ (address)
__________
Dear Sir/Madam,
I purchased a ….(mention item with specifications) from your store on …(mention date) .
The piece is on …. warranty (mention duration) . It was delivered on …(mention delivery
date, if any), and your representative familiarized me with its operation on …(mention date),
…(briefly explain the problem faced with the piece and repairs undertaken if any).
Since the piece is on warranty …, I request you to kindly …(mention how you want
concerned authority to assist you). I am enclosing a copy of …(mention documents you are
enclosing along with the letter). I am hoping for immediate action taken regarding this issue.
Thanking You
__________ (your name)

-- 79 of 80 --

68
3. Leave Application
Sender’s name and address:
Date:
Receiver’s name and address:
Subject: Sick Leave application
Respected Mr. /Mrs. [Name of the recipient] (or Sir/Madam),
I am writing this application to notify you that I am suffering from severe viral infection and
therefore, I need sick leave from work. I caught this infection last night and I will not be able
to come to the office for at least [number of days]. As notified by my doctor, it is best that I
take rest and recover properly before resuming work. The letter from the doctor is also
attached for your reference.
Kindly grant me a leave for [number of days] days.
.
I hope you will understand and grant me a leave for aforementioned period. Waiting your
approval.
Yours Sincerely,
[Your Name]
[Signature]

-- 80 of 80 --

