GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Degree
Branch: All branches
Course / Subject Code : BE01000031
Course / Subject Name : Chemistry
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 1 | 4
w. e. f. Academic Year: 2024-25
Semester: Ist Year
Category of the Course: BSC
Prerequisite: Basic knowledge of general chemistry.
Rationale: Every material is made up of atoms. Material is deeply integrated with engineering,
therefore, basic chemistry is essential to understand the nature and properties of
material. The selection, characterization, and suitability assessment of natural raw
materials essentially requires principles and concepts of basic chemistry. Successful
completion of this course content will enable engineers to understand, ascertain and
analyze the various new materials and enable to solve engineering problems.
Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, Student will able to:
No Course Outcomes RBT Level
01 Define chemical properties of atom, molecule, metal, alloys and energy sources. R
02 Relate atomic and molecular structure with their reactivity U
03 Solve the engineering problems related to fuel, water and corrosion A
04 Compare recent Nano-material, ecofriendly materials and energy storage
devices
E
05 Analyze properties of materials by various tools. N
*Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme
(in Hours)
Total
Credits
L+T+
(PR/2)
Assessment Pattern and Marks
Total
Marks
L T PR C
Theory Tutorial / Practical
ESE
(E)
PA / CA
(M) PA/CA (I) ESE (V)
3 0 2 4 70 30 20 30 150

-- 1 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Degree
Branch: All branches
Course / Subject Code : BE01000031
Course / Subject Name : Chemistry
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 2 | 4
Course Content:
Unit
No. Content No. of
Hours
% of
Weightage
1.
Basic chemistry: Wave mechanical concept of structure of atom; de
Broglie’s concept, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Schrodinger’s
wave equation.
Shape and structure of diatomic molecules; types of hybridization (sp,
sp2, sp3, sp3d and sp3d2). Hard soft acids and bases concept and its
applications.
8 18
2.
Water technology: Hardness of water, softening of water, boiler
problems; caustic embrittlement, sludge, scale, priming and foaming.
Corrosion: Introduction to corrosion, theories of corrosion, types of
corrosion, protective measurements against corrosion; organic and
inorganic materials, inhibitors, cathodic protection.
10 22
3.
Material chemistry: Properties and applications of fullerenes,
fullerols, carbon nanotubes, nanowires and metal nanoparticles. Top
down and bottom up approaches for synthesis of nanomaterials.
Biodegradable polymers. Bio-based feedstock.
Metals and Alloys: properties and applications. Heat treatments of
steel. Types of alloys, Alloys of copper, aluminum and nickel.
10 22
4.
Fuel and batteries: Refining of petroleum, determination of calorific
value by bombs calorimeter, Knocking and octane number. Ultimate and
proximate analysis of coal. Biofuels; Biodiesel and biomass briquettes.
Introduction to rechargeable cells, lithium batteries; construction and
working. Photolysis of water.
Fermentation: Synthesis of ethanol, acetic acid and pharma products
by fermentation.
10 22
5.
Instrumental analysis: Principle and working of UV-Visible, Infra-
Red, and NMR spectroscopy and their applications. Introduction to
chromatographic techniques; thin layer chromatography, gas
chromatography, liquid chromatography.
7 16
Total 45 100

-- 2 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Degree
Branch: All branches
Course / Subject Code : BE01000031
Course / Subject Name : Chemistry
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 3 | 4
Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
16 16 36 11 21 0
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per
Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)
References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
1. Engineering Chemistry, Willey-India.
2. Engineering Chemistry by Jain and Jain, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Co.
3. Engineering Chemistry by Marry Jane Shultz, Cencage Learning.
4. Engineering Chemistry by N. Krishnamurthy, P. Vallinaygam and D. Madhavan, PHI Learning.
5. Engineering Chemistry by K. Sesha Maheswaramma and Mridula Chugh, Pearson India
Education Pvt Ltd.
6. Engineering Chemistry by B K. Sharma, Krishna, Prakashan Media (P) Ltd.
7. A textbook of Engineering Chemistry by Shashi Chawla, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Co. Ltd.
8. Fundamentals of Biotechnology by B D Singh, Kalyani Publisher. New Delhi.
9. Essential of Physical Chemistry by Bahl and Tuli., S Chand & Co. Ltd, New Delhi.
10. Introduction to Nano Science by N N. Lindsay, Oxford University Press.
11. NANO: The Essentials by T Pradeep Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi.
(b) Open source software and website:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/
2. https://chem.libretexts.org/Courses/Remixer_University/Download_Center
3. https://ocw.uci.edu/collections/open_chemistry.html#
4. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/5-111sc-principles-of-chemical-science-fall-2014/
Suggested Course Practical List:
1. To determine the total hardness of the given samples by EDTA titrimetric method.
2. To estimate moisture content in the given coal sample.
3. To determine the amount of alkalinity present in the given samples.
4. To determine the amount of chloride present in the given water sample by Mohr’s method.
5. To determine the saponification value of an oil sample.
6. To determine the concentration of unknown solution by spectrophotometer.
7. To determine the percentage of iron in the given steel sample.

-- 3 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Engineering
Level: Degree
Branch: All branches
Course / Subject Code : BE01000031
Course / Subject Name : Chemistry
w.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ P a g e 4 | 4
8. To determine the amount of copper in a given brass sample.
9. To study the rate of corrosion by weight loss method.
10. To carry out analysis of pyrolusite ore.
11. To determine the Rf value of given sample by TLC method.
12. To synthesis of metal nanoparticles (silver, gold or copper etc.)
(Minimum 8 experiments to be performed)
List of Laboratory/Learning Resources Required:
1. Spectrophotometer.
2. Laboratory oven.
3. Melting point Instrument.
4. Electronic balance
5. TLC plates
6. Various chemicals and glassware
Suggested Project List:
1. Construction of bio-reactor
2. Construction of Li-cell
3. Set-up for photolysis of water
4. Synthesis of bio-degradable polymers
5. Design concept based on circular economy
Any other suitable project suggested by mentor or students.
Suggested Activities for Students:
1. Industrial visit
2. Organizing seminar and workshop
3. Participate in technical events
4. Participate and involve in startup
* * * * * * *

-- 4 of 4 --

