GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130607
Page 1 of 4
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
Semester – III
Subject Name: Building Construction Technology
Type of course: Civil Engineering
Prerequisite: Introduction to Civil Engineering Structures, Construction Materials
Rationale: The development of a basic understanding about the construction of different type of Structures
and application of the basic principles of Engineering to solve real life problems in construction practices is
necessary for civil engineers.
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme Credits Examination Marks Total
Marks	L T P C Theory Marks Practical Marks
ESE (E) PA (M) ESE (V) PA (I)
4 0 2 5 70 30 30 20 150
Content:
Sr. No. Content Total Hrs
1 Foundations:
Subsurface Investigation
Shallow Foundation : Necessity, Types, setting out, excavation, construction, failures of
foundation and remedial measures,
Deep Foundation: Pile Foundation: Introduction, uses, selection of pile, types of piles, pile
cap and pile shoe, pile driving/ boring methods, causes of failures of piles, IS Code of
piling IS2911 (Part I to IV) ; Caissons: Definition, uses, construction material, types of
caissons, loads on caisson, design features of caissons, floating of caissons, cutting edges,
sinking of caisson, tilting of caisson, shifting of caisson, caisson diseases
13
2 Masonry Construction :
a) Stone masonry: Technical terms, joints, Classification of Stone masonry.
b) Brick masonry: Technical terms, bonds in brick work.
c) Other Masonry: Composite masonry, Hollow blocks masonry, Partition Wall, Cavity
walls
d) Lintels & arches: Lintels – types, construction. Arches – technical terms, types,
construction.
e) Wall Finishes: Plastering, pointing and painting
08
3 Plain and Reinforced Concrete Construction: Pre-cast and cast-in-situ Construction,
Concrete 3D printing
Form work: Form work for R.C.C. Wall, slab, beam and column, centering for arches of
large spans, slip formwork – Horizontal & Vertical.
04
4 Building Components:
Doors and Windows :
a) Doors: Location, technical terms, size, types, construction, suitability.
16

-- 1 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130607
Page 2 of 4
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
Suggested Specification table with Marks (Theory): (For BE only)
Distribution of Theory Marks
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
20% 25% 25% 10% 10% 10%
Legends: R: Remembrance; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C:
Create and above Levels (Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)
Note: This specification table shall be treated as a general guideline for students and teachers. The actual
distribution of marks in the question paper may vary slightly from above table.
Reference Books:
1. Building Construction by B. C. Punamia
2. Building Construction by S. C. Rangwala
3. Building Construction by Gurucharan Singh
4. Heavy Construction by Vazirani & Chandola
5. Building Construction by Sushil Kumar
6. Building Construction by P.C Varghese,Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi
7. Hand book of Heavy construction: O’Brien, Havers & Stubb
8. Burea of Indian Standard
b) Windows: Factors affecting selection of size, shape, location and no. of windows, types,
construction, suitability, fixtures and fastenings, Ventilators
Stairs and Staircases: Definition, technical terms, requirements of good stair, fixing of
going and rise of a step, types of steps, classification, example – stair design/planning,
elevators, escalators.
Floorings: Introduction, essential requirements of a floor, factors affecting selection of
flooring material, types of ground floors and upper floor, pre cast concrete floor.
Roofs and Roof Coverings: Introduction, requirements of good roof technical terms,
classification, types of roof coverings for pitched roof. A.C. sheet roofs – fixing of A.C.
sheets, G.I. Sheets roofs, slates, flat roof – advantages, dis-advantages, types of flat
terraced roofing.
5 Special Works: Timbering in trenches, Control of Ground water in excavation, types of
scaffoldings, shoring, underpinning, Coffer Dams, Diaphragm Walls, Demolition of
structures.
Special Treatments: Fire resistant, water resistant, thermal insulation, acoustical
construction and anti-termite treatment.
10
6 Green Building as a solution to sustainable future, rating system for green building.
Principles, Concepts and Case study
05

-- 2 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130607
Page 3 of 4
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, Student will be able
Sr.
No. CO statement Marks %
weightage
CO-1 Develop in- depth understanding about construction materials, building
components, its construction process etc., and apply the knowledge to
execute normal sized building construction project. 25
CO-2 Recognize the associated entities involved in building construction process. 20
CO-3 Identify the factors to be considered in planning and construction of
buildings. 25
CO-4 Understand the practices and techniques for Temporary/Special
construction Works. 15
CO-5 Able to apply learning to further research in sustainable civil engineering
materials, construction technology and construction management field. 15
List of Practical:
A) Site visit
The student shall visit the construction site under supervision of faculty member /Site In-charge and
prepare a brief report containing sketches and photographs of site visits based on the following
assignments.
B) Assignment (Must contain Sketches)
(1) Assignment -1: Foundations & Setting Out work
(2) Assignment -2: Masonry Construction
(3) Assignment -3: Plain and Reinforced Concrete Construction
(4) Assignment -4: Doors and Windows
(5) Assignment -5: Stairs and Staircases
(6) Assignment -6: Floorings
(7) Assignment -7: Roofs and Roof Coverings
(8) Assignment -8: Temporary/Special Works

-- 3 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130607
Page 4 of 4
w.e.f. AY 2018-19
(9) Assignment -9: Special Treatments
(10) Assignment -10: Green Building
Major Equipment:
Working models / Chart of various construction Activities.
List of Open Source Software/learning website:
1. http://www.nptel.iitm.ac.in/courses/

-- 4 of 4 --

