Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 1 of 10
GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (GTU)
Competency-focused Outcome-based Green Curriculum-2021 (COGC-2021)
I– Semester
CourseTitle: Mathematics
(Course Code: 4300001)
Diploma program in which this course is offered 	Semester in which
offered
Automobile 	Engineering, 	Architecture 	Assistantship, 	Biomedical
Engineering, 	Ceramic, 	Engineering, 	Chemical 	Engineering, 	Civil
Engineering, 	Computer 	Engineering, 	Electrical 	Engineering,
Electronics &Communication Engineering, Environment Engineering,
Fabrication Technology, Information Technology, Instrumentation &
Control Engineering, Marine Engineering, Mechanical Engineering,
Mechatronics 	Engineering, 	Metallurgy 	Engineering, 	Mining
Engineering, Plastic Engineering, Power Electronics Engineering,
Printing 	Technology, 	Textile 	Designing, 	Textile 	Manufacturing
Technology, 	Textile 	Processing 	Technology, 	Computer
Science 	& 	Engineering 	(All 	branches)
First
1. 	RATIONALE
This course of Mathematics is being introduced as a foundation which will help students in
developing competency and the requisite course outcomes in most of the Diploma
Engineering programs. Components of Mathematics like Algebra, Geometry, Calculus,
Computer computation work as a tool to describe physical phenomena and to evaluate the
merit of different possible solutions. This course is an attempt to initiate the multi-
dimensional logical thinking and reasoning capabilities. It will help the students to apply the
basic principles of Mathematics to solve related technology problems. The course will give
the students an insight to apply and analyse the Engineering problems scientifically based on
the subject of Trigonometry, Differential Calculus and Basic elements of algebra and
coordinate geometry to give a comprehensive coverage at an introductory level.
2. 	COMPETENCY
The purpose of this course is to help the student to attain the following industry identified
competency through various teaching learning experiences:
Solve broad-based technology problems using the principles of mathematics.
3. 	COURSE OUTCOMES (COs)
The practical exercises, the underpinning knowledge and the relevant soft skills associated
with this competency are to be developed in the student to display the following COs:
a) 	Interpret the function graphically, numerically and analytically.
b) 	Demonstrate the ability to algebraically analyse basic functions used in Trigonometry.
c) 	Demonstrate the ability to Crack engineering related problems based on concepts of
Vectors.

-- 1 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 2 of 10
d) 	Solve basic engineering problems under given conditions of straight lines and circle.
e) 	Demonstrate the ability to analyze and illustrate the Functions using the concept of
Limit.
4. 	TEACHING AND EXAMINATION SCHEME
Teaching Scheme
(In Hours)
Total Credits
(L+T+P/2)
Examination Scheme
Theory Marks 	Practical Marks 	Total
Marks	L 	T 	P 	C 	CA 	ESE 	CA 	ESE
3 	1 	- 	4 	30* 	70 	- 	- 	100
(*):Out of 30 marks under the theory CA, 10 marks are for assessment of the micro-project to
facilitate integration of COs and the remaining 20 marks is the average of 2 tests to be taken
during the semester for the assessing the attainment of the cognitive domain UOs required
for the attainment of the COs.
Legends: L-Lecture; T – Tutorial/Teacher Guided Theory Practice; P -Practical; C – Credit, CA -
Continuous Assessment; ESE -End Semester Examination.
5. 	SUGGESTED PRACTICAL EXERCISES (During Tutorial Hours)
The following practical outcomes (PrOs) are the sub-components of the COs. These PrOs
need to be attained to achieve the Cos.
S.
No.
Practical Outcomes (PrOs) 	Unit
No.
Approx.
Hrs.
required
1 	Solve given problems of Determinant up to order 3*3. 	I 	1
2 Use Open source mathematical software to demonstrate the
graphs of given functions with its geometrical interpretation.
I 	1
3 Use Open source mathematical software to display given
logarithmic functions showing basic laws.
I 	1
4 Solve the given examples based on conversion of units of Angles
explaining the allied angles.
II 	1
5 Crack given problems based on the concept of Compound Angles,
Multiple and Submultiples angles.
II 	1
6
Plot the graph of sine and cosine functions with help of Open
source mathematical software and justify problems related to sum
and factor formulae.
II 	1
7 Use the concepts of Algebra to Solve given engineering related
problems based on Magnitude of a vector.
III 	1
8 	Apply the concept of Dot Product to solve given engineering 	III 	1

-- 2 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 3 of 10
S.
No.
Practical Outcomes (PrOs) 	Unit
No.
Approx.
Hrs.
required
related problems.
9 Explain the physical significance of the Cross Product and apply the
concept to solve given engineering related problems.
III 	1
10 Apply the concept of various forms of line, slope, intercept to solve
simple problems.
IV 	1
11 Use the concepts of equations of Parallel lines and Perpendicular
lines to solve specified problems.
IV 	1
12 Use the concept of Tangent and Normal to solve related
engineering problems.
IV 	1
13 Explain Limit of a function graphically and solve the specified
problems.
V 	1
14 Apply the Standard Formulae of Limit and crack the specified
problems.
V 	1
Total 	14
Note
i. More Practical Exercises can be designed and offered by the respective course teacher to
develop the industry relevant skills/outcomes to match the COs. The above table is only a
suggestive list.
ii. The following are some sample ‘Process’ and ‘Product’ related skills (more may be
added/deleted depending on the course) that occur in the above listed Practical Exercises
of this course required which are embedded in the COs and ultimately the competency.
S.
No.
Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs 	Weightage in %
Geometric Thinking: Comprehend geometric concepts to
prove theorems by applying apt results to solve well
defined Engineering problems.
1. 	Experiment with transformations in the plane. 	30
2. 	Define trigonometric ratios and solve problems involving
right triangles.
30
3. 	Apply theorems about circles. 	40
Total 	100

-- 3 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 4 of 10
S.
No.
Sample Performance Indicators for the PrOs 	Weightage in %
Algebraic Thinking: Create, interpret, use, and analyze
expressions, equations, and inequalities in a variety of
contexts.
1. 	Represent, 	interpret, 	and 	solve 	variable 	expressions,
equations, and inequalities.
60
2. 	Write expressions in equivalent forms to solve problems. 	40
Total 	100
6. 	MAJOR EQUIPMENT/ INSTRUMENTS AND SOFTWARE REQUIRED
These major equipment/instruments and Software required to develop PrOs are given below
with 	broad 	specifications 	to 	facilitate 	procurement 	of 	them 	by 	the
administrators/management of the institutes. This will ensure conduction of practical in all
institutions across the state in proper way so that the desired skills are developed in
students.
S.
No. Equipment Name with Broad Specifications PrO.No.
1 	Computer System & LCD Projector 	2,3,6,10,13
2 	Scientific Calculator (Display type: Natural Display
Algebraic input logic: Natural V.P.A.M.
Significand function: 10+2.
1,5,10
7. 	AFFECTIVE DOMAIN OUTCOMES
The following sample Affective Domain Outcomes (ADOs) are embedded in many of the
above-mentioned COs and PrOs. More could be added to fulfill the development of this
course competency.
a) 	Work as a leader/a team member.
b) 	Follow ethical practices.
c) 	Practice environmentally friendly methods and processes. (Environment related)
The ADOs are best developed through the laboratory/field-based exercises. Moreover, the
level of achievement of the ADOs according to Krathwohl’s ‘Affective Domain Taxonomy’
should gradually increase as planned below:
i. 	‘Valuing Level’ in 1st
ii. 	‘Organization Level’ in 2
year
nd
iii. ‘Characterization Level’ in 3
year.
rd year.

-- 4 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 5 of 10
8. UNDERPINNING THEORY
The major underpinning theory is given below based on the higher level UOs of Revised
Bloom’s taxonomy that are formulated for development of the COs and competency. If
required, more such UOs could be included by the course teacher to focus on attainment of
COs and competency.
Unit 	Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub-topics
Unit – I
Determinant
and Function
1a. Solve simple problems of
Determinant up to order 3*3.
1b. Explain graphically the given
functions.
1c. Solve simple problems using
concepts of Logarithms
1.1 	Determinant and its value 	up to
3rd order (Without properties)
1.2 	Function and simple examples.
1.3 	Logarithm as a function
1.4 	Laws of Logarithm and related
Simple examples
Unit– II
Trigonometry
2a. Apply the concept of
Compound angle, Allied
angle, and Multiple angles to
solve the given simple
engineering problem(s)
2b. Explain the concept of Sub-
Multiple and solve related
problem(s).
2c. Invoke the concept of Sum
and Factor formulae to solve
the given simple problem(s)
2d. Investigate given simple
problems using inverse
Trigonometric functions.
2.1 	Units of Angles (degree and radian)
2.2 	Trigonometric Functions
2.3 	Allied & Compound Angles,
Multiple –Submultiples angles
2.4 	Graph of Sine and Cosine,
2.5 	Periodic Trigonometric function
2.6 	Sum and factor formulae
2.7 	Inverse Trigonometric function
Unit– III
Vectors
3a. Apply the concept of
algebraic operations of
Vectors to solve given simple
engineering problem(s)
3b. Apply the concept of Scalar
and Vector product to solve
specified simple problem(s)
3c. Solve problems of work done
and moment of force using
the concept of Vectors.
3.1 	Vector, Addition, Subtraction,
Magnitude and direction.
3.2 	Scalar and Vector Product and it's
properties
3.3 	Angle between two Vectors
3.4 	Applications of Scalar and Vector
Product (Work Done and Moment
of Force)
Unit– IV
Coordinate
Geometry
4a. Employ the equation of
straight line to solve given
simple problems.
4b. Apply the concept of slope
and its consequences to
4.1 	Straight line (Two-point form) and
slope of straight line
4.2 	Slope point form, Intercept form,
General form of line
4.3 	Condition of parallel and

-- 5 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 6 of 10
Unit 	Unit Outcomes (UOs)
(4 to 6 UOs at different levels)
Topics and Sub-topics
solve the given problems.
4c. Find the angle between two
lines using the concept of
Parallel and Perpendicular
lines.
4d. Apply the concept of
equation of circle with center
and radius to solve the given
problems.
4e. Solve problems related to
general equation of circle
based on tangent and
normal.
perpendicular lines
4.4 	Equations of Parallel lines and
Perpendicular lines to the given
lines
4.5 	Angle between two lines.
4.6 	Equation of circle with center and
Radius.
4.7 	General equation of circle.
4.8 	Tangent and normal to a circle.
Unit– V
Limit
5a. Analyse the characteristic of
functions using the concept
of Limit.
5b. Solve the given problems
using standard formulae of
Limit
5.1 	Limit of a Function.
5.2 	Standard formulae of Limit and
related simple examples.
Note: The Unit Outcomes (UOs) need to be formulated at the ‘Application Level’ and above
of Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy’ to accelerate the attainment of the COs and the competency.
9. SUGGESTED SPECIFICATION TABLE FOR QUESTION PAPER DESIGN
Unit
No.
Unit Title 	Teaching
Hours
Distribution of Theory Marks
R
Level
U
Level
A
Level
Total
Marks
I 	Determinant and Function 	9 	4 	7 	5 	16
II 	Trigonometry 	12 	4 	5 	5 	14
III 	Vectors 	7 	4 	6 	4 	14
IV 	Coordinate Geometry 	8 	4 	5 	5 	14
V 	Limit 	6 	3 	4 	5 	12
Total 	42 	19 	27 	24 	70
Legends: R=Remember, U=Understand, A=Apply and above (Revised Bloom’s taxonomy)
Note: This specification table provides general guidelines to assist students for their learning
and to teachers to teach and question paper designers/setters to formulate test items/questions
to assess the attainment of the UOs. The actual distribution of marks at different taxonomy
levels (of R, U and A) in the question paper may slightly vary from above table.

-- 6 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 7 of 10
10. 	SUGGESTED STUDENT ACTIVITIES
Other than the classroom and laboratory learning, following are the suggested student-
related co-curricular activities which can be undertaken to accelerate the attainment of the
various outcomes in this course: Students should perform following activities in group and
prepare reports of about 5 pages for each activity. They should also collect/record physical
evidences for their (student’s) portfolio which may be useful for their placement interviews:
a) 	Identify engineering problems based on real world problems relevant to content
of the unit and solve these problems in the light of free tutorials available on the
internet.
b) 	Explore the opportunity to visit Science city, ISRO or nearby Science centres.
c) 	Explore the opportunity to visit Mathematics Lab Virtually.
d) 	Prepare charts showing formulas of multiple and sub multiple trigonometric
functions.
e) 	Use Graphing calculator to plot the graph of functions showing Engineering
applications.
f) 	Collect set of problems based on concept of limit with real world applications and
make a presentation.
g) 	Communicate mathematical thinking coherently and clearly to other students,
peers, and others.
11. 	SUGGESTED SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES (if any)
These are sample strategies, which the teacher can use to accelerate the attainment of the
various outcomes in this course:
a) 	Massive open online courses (MOOCs) may be used to teach various topics/sub
topics.
b) 	Guide student(s) in undertaking micro-projects.
c) 	‘L” in section No. 4means different types of teaching methods that are to be
employed by teachers to develop the outcomes.
d) 	About 20% of the topics/sub-topics which are relatively simpler or descriptive in
nature is to be given to the students for self-learning, but to be assessed using
different assessment methods.
e) 	With respect to section No.10, teachers need to ensure to create opportunities and
provisions for co-curricular activities.
f) Explore the possibility for understanding the Biosphere through Mathematics
g) Guide students for using data manuals.
12.SUGGESTED MICRO-PROJECTS
Only one micro-project is planned to be undertaken by a student that needs to be assigned
to him/her in the beginning of the semester. In the first four semesters, the micro-project
are group-based (group of 3 to 5). However, in the fifth and sixth semesters, the number of
students in the group should not exceed three.
The micro-project could be industry application based, internet-based, workshop-
based, laboratory-based or field-based. Each micro-project should encompass two or more

-- 7 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 8 of 10
COs which are in fact, an integration of PrOs, UOs and ADOs. Each student will have to
maintain dated work diary consisting of individual contribution in the project work and give
a seminar presentation of it before submission. The duration of the microproject should be
about 14-16 (fourteen to sixteen) student engagement hours during the course.The students
ought to submit micro-project by the end of the semester (so that they develop the industry-
oriented COs).
A suggestive list of micro-projects is given here. This should relate highly with
competency of the course and the COs. Similar micro-projects could be added by the
concerned course teacher:
a) 	Draw graphs of given Functions like 2
2 	1, 	,sin 	, cos	x 	x 	x 	x	− 	etc and verify using
suitable Open-source software like GeoGebra, DPLOT and GRAPH.
b) 	Prepare the Charts of formulae for limit, Vector, Trigonometry, Co-ordinate
Geometry, and Logarithm.
c) 	Prepare the cardboard models based on Mathematical concepts.
d) 	Draw various lines, circles using GeoGebra software.
e) 	Prepare projects on height and distance using Trigonometry.
f) 	Use PHET website for simulation of Vector Algebra.
g) 	Prepare a presentation/seminar on any relevant topic of interdisciplinary nature.
h) 	Prepare a write up on the Historical path of Calculus.
i) 	Prepare models of graphical representation for the existence of limits of given
functions.
j) 	Prepare charts showing formulas of multiple and sub multiple trigonometric
functions and its usefulness.
k) 	Formulate models to describe mathematical relationships and analyze data.
13.SUGGESTED LEARNING RESOURCES
S.
No. Title of Book Author 	Publication with place, year
and ISBN
1 	Engineering Mathematics
(Third edition).
Croft, Anthony 	Pearson Education, New Delhi,
2014.
ISBN 978-81-317-2605-1
2 	A Text Book of Vector
Analysis
Narayan Shanti and
Mittal P.K
S. Chand Publication,
ISBN 978-8121922432
3 	Calculus and Analytic
Geometry
G. B. Thomas,
R. L. Finney
Addison Wesley, 9th Edition,
1995.
ISBN 978-8174906168
4 	Understanding
Engineering Mathematics
John Bird 	Routledge; 1st edition
ISBN 978-0415662840
5 	Advanced Engineering
Mathematics
Krezig, Ervin 	Wiley Publ., New
Delhi,2014,
ISBN: 978-0-470-45836-5

-- 8 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 9 of 10
14.SUGGESTED LEARNING WEBSITES
a. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCLJVrQyPYsseCf78QWCDsvA/featured
(YouTube Channel of DTEGUJ)
b. https://www.geogebra.org/?lang=en
c. https://phet.colorado.edu/
d. www.dplot.com/ - DPlot
e. www.wolfram.com/mathematica/
f. https://www.khanacademy.org/
g. www.easycalculation.com
i. www.scilab.org/ - SCI Lab
j. https://cnx.org/contents/cCXsMC7-@3.2:rOtjgdjI@5/Trigonometry
k. https://www.embibe.com/exams/real-life-applications-of-trigonometry
l. https://opentextbc.ca/calculusv1openstax/chapter/the-limit-of-a-function
m.https://www.accessengineeringlibrary.com/?implicit-login=true
15.PO-COMPETENCY-CO MAPPING
Legend: ‘3’ for high, ‘2’ for medium, ‘1’ for low and ‘-’ for no correlation of each CO with PO.
16. COURSE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
GTU Resource Persons
S.
No.
Name and Designation Institute 	Contact No. Email
1 	Dr. N. R. Pandya
I/C Principal (Retired)
Head of Department
Government Polytechnic,
Kheda
9099097990 	nrpandyagp@gmail.com
Semester I 	Mathematics (Course Code: 4300001)
POs and PSOs
Competency
& Course Outcomes
PO 1
Basic &
Discipline
specific
knowledge
PO 2
Problem
Analysis
PO 3
Design/
development
of solutions
PO 4
Engineering
Tools,
Experimentation
&Testing
PO 5
Engineering
practices for
society,
sustainability &
environment
PO 6
Project
Management
PO 7
Life-
long
learning
Competency
Solve broad-based technology problems
using the principles of mathematics.
3 	2 	1 	- 	- 	- 	1
Course Outcomes
CO a) Interpret the function graphically,
numerically and analytically. 3 2 	1 	- 	- 	- 	-
CO b) Demonstrate the ability to
algebraically analyze basic
functions used in Trigonometry.
3 1 	1 	- 	- 	- 	1
CO c) Demonstrate the ability to Crack
engineering related problems
based on concepts of Vectors.
3 1 	1 	- 	- 	- 	1
CO d) Solve basic engineering problems
under given conditions of straight
lines and circle.
3 1 	- 	- 	- 	- 	-
CO e) Demonstrate the ability to analyze
and illustrate the Function using
the concept of Limit.
3 - 	- 	- 	- 	- 	-

-- 9 of 10 --

Mathematics 	Course Code: 4300001
NITTTR Bhopal – GTU - COGC-2021 Curriculum
Page 10 of 10
2 	Dr. N. A. Dani
Sr. Lecturer
Government Polytechnic,
Rajkot
9427184187 	nilesh_a_d@yahoo.co.in
3 	Mr. P. N. Joshi
Sr. Lecturer
A.V.P.T.I, Rajkot 	9924844699 	pnj2004@rediffmail.com
4 	Dr. J. S. Prajapati
Sr. Lecturer
R.C.T.I, Ahmedabad 	9426469752 	jsprajapati26@gmail.com
5 	Dr. Sachin J. Gajjar
Lecturer
Government Polytechnic,
Gandhinagar
9925362754 	gjr.sachin@gmail.com
6 	Dr. Nirav H. Shah
Lecturer
Government Polytechnic,
Jamnagar
9327632570 	Nirav.hs@gmail.com
NITTTR Resource Person
S.
No. Name and Designation 	Department 	Contact No. 	Email
1 	Dr. Deepak Singh
Associate Professor
(Mathematics) Former
Head, DAS
Department of
Applied Science
Education,
NITTTR, Bhopal
9826991961 	dsingh@nitttrbpl.ac.in

-- 10 of 10 --

