GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130702
Semester – III
Subject Name: Data Structures
Type of course: Compulsory
Prerequisite: Computer Programming & utilization
Rationale: Data structure is a subject of primary importance in Information and Communication
Technology. Organizing or structuring data is important for implementation of efficient algorithms
and program development. Efficient problem solving needs the application of appropriate data
structure during program development.
Understanding of data structures is essential and this facilitates the understanding of the
language. The practice and assimilation of data structure techniques is essential for programming. The
knowledge of „C‟ language and data structures will be reinforced by practical exercises during the
course of study. The course will help students to develop the capability of selecting a particular data
structure.
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme Credits Examination Marks Total
Marks	L T P C Theory Marks Practical Marks
ESE (E) PA (M) ESE (V) PA (I)
3 0 4 5 70 30 30 20 150
Contents:
Sr. No. Topics Teaching
Hrs.
Module
Weightage
1 INTRODUCTION TO DATA STRUCTURE:
Data Management concepts, Data types – primitive and
non-primitive, Performance Analysis and Measurement
(Time and space analysis of algorithms-Average, best and
worst case analysis), Types of Data Structures- Linear &
Non Linear Data Structures.
04 10
2 LINEAR DATA STRUCTURE
Array: Representation of arrays, Applications of arrays,
sparse matrix and its representation
Stack: Stack-Definitions & Concepts, Operations On
Stacks, Applications of Stacks, Polish Expression, Reverse
Polish Expression And Their Compilation, Recursion,
Tower of Hanoi
Queue: Representation Of Queue, Operations On Queue,
Circular Queue, Priority Queue, Array representation of
Priority Queue, Double Ended Queue, Applications of
Queue
Linked List: Singly Linked List, Doubly Linked list,
Circular linked list ,Linked implementation of Stack,
Linked implementation of Queue, Applications of linked
list.
13 30
3 NONLINEAR DATA STRUCTURE :
Tree-Definitions and Concepts, Representation of binary
tree, Binary tree traversal (Inorder, postorder, preorder),
Threaded binary tree, Binary search trees, Conversion of
13 30

-- 1 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130702
General Trees To Binary Trees, Applications Of Trees-
Some balanced tree mechanism, eg. AVL trees, 2-3 trees,
Height Balanced, Weight Balance, Graph-Matrix
Representation Of Graphs, Elementary Graph
operations,(Breadth First Search, Depth First Search,
Spanning Trees, Shortest path, Minimal spanning tree )
4 HASHING AND FILE STRUCTURES :
Hashing: The symbol table, Hashing Functions, Collision-
Resolution Techniques,
File Structure: Concepts of fields, records and files,
Sequential, Indexed and Relative/Random File
Organization, Indexing structure for index files, hashing
for direct files, Multi-Key file organization and access
methods.
06 15
5 Sorting & Searching:
Sorting – Bubble Sort, Selection Sort, Quick Sort, Merge
Sort Searching – Sequential Search and Binary Search
06 15
Reference Books:
1. An Introduction to Data Structures with Applications. by Jean-Paul Tremblay & Paul G.
Sorenson Publisher-Tata McGraw Hill.
2. Data Structures using C & C++ -By Ten Baum Publisher – Prenctice-Hall International.
3. Fundamentals of Computer Algorithms by Horowitz, Sahni,Galgotia Pub. 2001 ed.
4. Fundamentals of Data Structures in C++-By Sartaj Sahani.
5. Data Structures: A Pseudo-code approach with C -By Gilberg & Forouzan Publisher-
Thomson Learning.
Course Outcomes:
Sr.
No.
CO Statement Marks % weightage
CO-1 Define and classify various data structures, storage structures and
common operations on them
10
CO-2 Create various linear data structures with their representation and
perform different operations on them
20
CO-3 Create various nonlinear data structures with their representation
and perform different operations on them
20
CO-4 Apply various searching sorting techniques on data set 30
CO-5 Solve the given a problem using an appropriate data structure to
achieve optimal performance and compare its performance with
other possible data structures
20
List of Practical:
At least 10 practical should be performed by students using programming language.
1. Introduction to pointers. Call by Value and Call by reference.
2. Introduction to Dynamic Memory Allocation. DMA functions malloc(), calloc(), free() etc.
3. Implement a program for stack that performs following operations using array.

-- 2 of 3 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Bachelor of Engineering
Subject Code: 3130702
(a) PUSH (b) POP (c) PEEP (d) CHANGE (e) DISPLAY
4. Implement a program to convert infix notation to postfix notation using stack.
5. Write a program to implement QUEUE using arrays that performs following operations (a)
INSERT (b) DELETE (c) DISPLAY
5. Write a program to implement Circular Queue using arrays that performs following
operations. (a) INSERT (b) DELETE (c) DISPLAY
6. Write a menu driven program to implement following operations on the singly linked list.
(a) Insert a node at the front of the linked list.
(b) Insert a node at the end of the linked list.
(c) Insert a node such that linked list is in ascending order.(according to info. Field)
(d) Delete a first node of the linked list.
(e) Delete a node before specified position.
(f) Delete a node after specified position.
7. Write a program to implement stack using linked list.
8. Write a program to implement queue using linked list.
9. Write a program to implement following operations on the doubly linked list.
(a) Insert a node at the front of the linked list.
(b) Insert a node at the end of the linked list.
(c) Delete a last node of the linked list.
(d) Delete a node before specified position.
10. Write a program to implement following operations on the circular linked list.
(a) Insert a node at the end of the linked list.
(b) Insert a node before specified position.
(c) Delete a first node of the linked list.
(d) Delete a node after specified position.
10. Write a program which create binary search tree.
11. Implement recursive and non-recursive tree traversing methods inorder, preorder and post-
order traversal.
12. Write a program to implement Queue Sort
13. Write a program to implement Merge Sort
14. Write a program to implement Bubble Sort
15. Write a program to implement Binary Search.

-- 3 of 3 --

