GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code : BE01000071
Course / Subject Name : Design Thinking
W.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 1 of 4
Prerequisite: NIL
Rationale: This course is designed for students from all disciplines who seek to understand
design thinking for brand, product, and service development. It covers essential
concepts, methods, and techniques of design thinking, empowering students to drive
innovation in both business and the social sector.
Course Outcome:
After Completion of the Course, the Student will be able to:
No Course Outcomes RBT Level
01 Understand the fundamental principles and importance of Design Thinking in
fostering innovation and its relevance in engineering. UN
02 Apply systematic problem identification, problem framing-articulation, and
problem-solving approaches in the context of Design Thinking. AP
03
Analyze and evaluate different tools and methodologies used in Design
Thinking, such as observation, ethnographic research, and mind mapping, to
gain insights into user unmet needs.
AN
04
Develop and refine product concepts by preparing product development
canvases (PDC) that consider product experience, functions, features, and
components. (Synthesis level)
AP
05
Create a final working prototype or an alternative prototype for projects with
limitations, showcasing the functionality and features, Viability, Impact,
Sustainability, Scalability, Costing, and Resources for the Creation
CR
*Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy (RBT)
W. e. f. Academic Year: 2024-25
Semester: Ist Year
Category of the Course: ESC

-- 1 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code : BE01000071
Course / Subject Name : Design Thinking
W.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 2 of 4
Teaching and Examination Scheme:
Teaching Scheme
(in Hours)
Total Credits
L+T+ (PR/2) Assessment Pattern and Marks
Total
Marks
L T PR C Theory Tutorial / Practical
ESE (E) PA / CA (M) PA/CA (I) ESE (V)
00 00 04 02 00 00 20 80 100
Course Content:
Unit
No. Content No. of
Hours
% of
Weightage
1.
Introduction to Design Thinking for Engineers
What Sets Design Thinking Apart? Essential Design Thinking Skills,
Core Principles of Design Thinking, Foundations of Design Thinking,
Building an Effective Design Thinking Team, Design Thinking
Workshops and Meetings
Exercises and Case-Based Discussions
08 13
2.
Stages of the Design Thinking Approach
Class Exercise: Review the Case Study
Observation: Role of observation in understanding product and process
challenges, Techniques for effective product and process observation
Exercise: Based on the AEIOU Framework
Empathize with Customers/Users
Exercise: Engage with Customers/Users
Define the Problem, Exercise: Review and Follow-Up, Define the
Point of View
Ideate Exercise: Develop Potential Solutions
Prototype Alternate Solutions Exercise: Create a Prototype of the
Solution
Test the Solutions Exercise: Prepare and Conduct Tests of the
Prototype and Solution
14 23

-- 2 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code : BE01000071
Course / Subject Name : Design Thinking
W.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 3 of 4
Exploring Design Thinking in Innovation: Understanding the Role
of Design Thinking in Product and Process Innovation, Differentiating
Engineering Design and Design Thinking
Contrasting Approaches: Engineering Design vs. Design Thinking
Stanford Design thinking process and Double Diamond model
3.
Design Thinking Techniques
Understanding Listening and Empathizing Techniques: Exploring
observation methods, Utilizing a structured, open-ended approach for
effective communication,
Ideation Tools: Brainstorming techniques for idea generation,
Applying innovation heuristics to foster creativity.
Introduction to SCAMPER technique: Explanation of SCAMPER
(Substitute, Combine, Adapt, Modify, put to another use, Eliminate,
Reverse) and its application in diverse innovation contexts (product,
system, process)
Practical exercises and case studies demonstrating SCAMPER’s
effectiveness in idea generation
Prototype and Test Techniques: Type of Prototype (PoC), Forms of
testing in Design Thinking, Prepare and A/B Test of the prototype
14 23
4.
Methods and Tools for Design Thinking Practice
Empathize: Ask five why questions, Empathy map, storytelling, critical
items diagram, mind map, journey map
Ideate: Brainstorming, 2X2 matrix, NABC Methods
Prototype: Exploration map, Minimum Viable Product (MVP),
Feasibility Testing, Viability Testing, Sustainability Testing
Test: Collet Feedback, iterate and improve the ideas
14 23
5.
Adopt and Adapt Design Thinking
Cautions and Pitfalls: Assumptions
Exercise: Assumptions
Pitfalls and Cautions in Design Thinking Workgroups
Application of Design Thinking in Academic Projects Across
Disciplines
10 18
Total 60 100

-- 3 of 4 --

GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY
Program Name: Bachelor of Engineering
Level: UG
Branch: ALL
Course / Subject Code : BE01000071
Course / Subject Name : Design Thinking
W.e.f. 2024-25 http://syllabus.gtu.ac.in/ Page 4 of 4
Suggested Specification Table with Marks (Theory):
Distribution of Theory Marks (in %)
R Level U Level A Level N Level E Level C Level
0 15 40 15 20 10
Where R: Remember; U: Understanding; A: Application, N: Analyze and E: Evaluate C: Create (as per
Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy)
References/Suggested Learning Resources:
(a) Books:
1. Pavan Soni (2020), Design Your Thinking: The Mindsets, Toolsets, and Skill Sets for Creative
Problem-solving, Penguin Random House India Private Limited
2. Gasparini, Andrea. "Perspective and use of empathy in design thinking." In ACHI, the Eight
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, pp. 49-54. 2015.
3. Defining a Problem Statement — Design Thinking by Priyanka Jeph in QED42
4. Scamper: How to Use the Best Ideation Methods by Rikke Friis Dam and Teo Yu Siang in
Interaction Design Foundation
5. Design: Creation of Artifacts in Society by Prof. Karl Ulrich, U. Penn
6. Tim Brown, "Change by Design: How Design Thinking Transforms Organizations and Inspires
Innovation."
7. Jeanne Liedtka, Tim Ogilvie, and Rachel Brozenske, "Design Thinking for the Greater Good:
Innovation in the Social Sector."
(b) Open-source software and website:
1. Google Workspace: Docs, Sheets, & Slides
2. Google Jamboard
3. Storyboard
4. Any other Relevant Tools
(c) Suggestive MOOC Course
1. B.K. Chakravarthy, Design Technology and Innovation, SWAYAM NPTEL (Online)
2. B.K. Chakravarthy, Innovation by Design, SWAYAM NPTEL (Online)
3. Nina Sabnani, Understanding Design, SWAYAM NPTEL (Online)
4. R T Krishnan and V Dhabolkar, Managing Innovation, SWAYAM NPTEL (Online)
Note:
1. Based on Design Thinking, individual BoS may propose mini projects in the relevant subject in
higher semesters.

-- 4 of 4 --

